THE STANDARD EDITION OF
THE COMPLETE PSYCHOLOGICAL WORKS
OF SIGMUND FREUD

*
VOLUME XVI

0

THE STANDARD EDITION
OF THE COMPLETE PSYCHOLOGICAL WORKS OF

!
I

SIGMUND FREUD
Translatedfrom the German under the General Editorship of
JAMES STRACHEY

'

In Collaboration with

ANNA FREUD
Assisted by
ALIX STRACHEY and ALAN TYSON

,

''

VOLUME XVI
(1916-1917)

Introductory Lectures on
Psycho-Analysis
(PART III)

LONDON

THE HOGARTH PRESS
AND THE INSTITUTE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

PUBLISHED BY

THE HOGARTH PRESS LIMITED
BY ARRANGEMENT WITH GEORGE ALLEN AND UNWIN LTD*

LONDON

CLARKE. IRWIN AND CO. LTD,
TORONTO

This Edition first Published in
1963
Reprinted 1964, 1968, 1971, 1973, 1975, 1978 and 1981

ISBN O 7012 OO67 7

All rights reserved. No part of this publica­
tion may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form, or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photo­
copying, recording or otherwise, without the
prior permission of The Hogarth Press Ltd.
TRANSLATION AND EDITORIAL MATTER

© THE INSTITUTE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS
AND ANGELA RICHARDS

1963

PRINTED AND BOUND IN GREAT BRITAIN

BY BUTLER AND TANNER LTD., FROME

CONTENTS
VOLUME SIXTEEN

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHO-ANALYSIS
(1916-1917 [1915-1917])

PART III. GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES
(1917 [1916-17])
Lecture
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XIX
XX
XXI

I

Psycho-Analysis and Psychiatry
page 243
The Sense of Symptoms
257
Fixation to Traumas—The Unconscious
273
Resistance and Repression
286
The Sexual Life of Human Beings
303
The Development of the Libido and the Sexual
Organizations
320
XXII
Some Thoughts on Development and Regression—
Aetiology
339
XXIII
The Paths to the Formation of Symptoms
358
XXIV
The Common Neurotic State
378
XXV
Anxiety
392
XXVI
The Libido Theory and Narcissism
412
XXVII Transference
431
XXVIII Analytic Therapy
448

1

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND AUTHOR INDEX

1
j

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
INDEX OF PARAPRAXES

■

INDEX OF DREAMS
INDEX OF SYMBOLS
GENERAL INDEX

[
/

i

v

464
477
478
480
481
483

PART III

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES
(1917 [1916-17])

I

LECTURE XVI

PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND PSYCHIATRY
Ladies and Gentlemen,—I am delighted to see you again,
at the beginning of a new academic year, for a resumption of
our discussions. Last year I spoke to you of the way in which
psycho-analysis deals with parapraxes and dreams. This year
I should like to introduce you to an understanding of the
phenomena of neurosis, which, as you will soon learn, have a
great deal in common with both of the others. But I must warn
you in advance that I shall not be able to offer you the same
position in relation to me this year as I did last year. At that
time I set great store on never taking a step without remaining
in agreement with your judgement; I discussed a great deal
with you and gave way to your objections—in fact I recognized
you and your ‘common sense’ as a deciding factor. But this is
no longer possible and for a simple reason. Parapraxes and
dreams were not unfamiliar to you as phenomena; we might say
that you had as much experience or could easily obtain as much
experience of them as I had. The region of the phenomena of
neurosis is, however, strange to you; in so far as you are not
doctors yourselves, you have no other access to them than
through what I have to tell you; and of what help is the best
judgement if it is not accompanied by familiarity with the
material that is to be judged?
But you must not take this warning of mine to mean that I
propose to give you dogmatic lectures and to insist on your un­
qualified belief. Such a misunderstanding would do me a
grave injustice. I do not wish to arouse conviction; I wish to
stimulate thought and to upset prejudices. If as a result of lack
of knowledge of the material you are not in a position to form
a judgement, you should neither believe nor reject. You should
listen and allow what I tell you to work on you. It is not so easy
to arrive at convictions, or, if they are reached easily, they soon
turn out to be worthless and incapable of resistance. The only
person who has a right to a conviction is someone who, like me,
has worked for many years at the same material and who, in
243

244

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

doing so, has himself had the same new and surprising experi­
ences. What is the good, then, in the sphere of the intellect, of
these sudden convictions, these lightning-like conversions, these
instantaneous rejections? Is it not clear that the ‘coup de foudre’,
love at first sight, is derived from quite another sphere, from
that of the emotions? We do not even require of our patients that
they should bring a conviction of the truth of psycho-analysis
into the treatment or be adherents of it. Such an attitude often
raises our suspicions. The attitude that we find the most desir­
able in them is a benevolent scepticism. So you too should
endeavour to allow the psycho-analytic view to grow up
quietly in you alongside of the popular or psychiatric one,
till opportunities arise for the two to influence each other,
to compete with each other and to unite in leading to a con­
clusion.
On the other hand, you should not for a moment suppose
that what I put before you as the psycho-analytic view is a
speculative system. It is on the contrary empirical—either a
direct expression of observations or the outcome of a process of
working them over. Whether this working-over has been carried
out in an adequate and justifiable manner will appear in the
course of the further advance of the science, and indeed I may
assert without boasting, after a lapse of nearly twenty-five years,
and having reached a fairly advanced age,1 that these observa­
tions are the result of particularly hard, concentrated and deep­
going work. I have often had an impression that our opponents
were unwilling to take any account of this origin of our theses,
as though they thought what was in question were merely
subjectively determined notions to which someone else might
oppose others of his own choice. This behaviour of our oppon­
ents is not entirely intelligible to me. It may perhaps be due to
the fact that, as a doctor, one usually makes so little contact with
neurotic patients and pays so little attention to what they say
that one cannot imagine the possibility that anything valuable
could be derived from their communications—the possibility,
that is, of carrying out any thorough observations upon them.
I take this opportunity of assuring you that in the course of
these lectures I shall indulge in very little controversy, especially
with individuals. I have never been able to convince myself of
1 [Freud was about 60 at this time.]

i

XVI. PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND PSYCHIATRY

245

the truth of the maxim that strife is the father of all things. I
believe it is derived from the Greek sophists and is at fault, like
them, through overvaluing dialectics. It seems to me, on the
contrary, that what is known as scientific controversy is on the
whole quite unproductive, apart from the fact that it is almost
always conducted on highly personal lines. Up to a few years
ago I was able to boast that I had only once engaged in a
regular scientific dispute—with one single worker (Lowenfeld
of Munich).1 It ended in our becoming friends and we have
remained so to this day. But I did not repeat the experiment
for a long time, as I did not feel sure that the outcome would be
the same.2
Now you will no doubt conclude that a rejection such as this
of all written discussion argues a high degree of inaccessibility
to objections, of obstinacy, or, to use the polite colloquial
scientific term, of pig-headedness \Verranntheit\. I should like to
say in reply that when once, after such hard work, one has
arrived at a conviction, one has at the same time acquired a
certain right to retain that conviction with some tenacity. I may
also urge that in the course of my work I have modified my
views on a few important points, changed them and replaced
them by fresh ones—and in each case, of course, I have made
this publicly known. And the outcome of this frankness? Some
people have taken no notice whatever of my self-corrections and
continue to this day to criticize me for hypotheses which have
long ceased to have the same meaning for me. Others reproach
me precisely for these changes and regard me as untrustworthy
on their account. Of course! a person who has occasionally
changed his opinions is deserving of no belief at all, since he has
made it all too likely that his latest assertions may also be
mistaken; but a person who has unflinchingly maintained what
he once asserted, or who cannot be quickly enough persuaded
to give it up, must naturally be pig-headed or stubborn! What
1 [This was on the subject of Freud’s early theories on anxiety. His
second paper on the question (1895/) was entirely concerned with
Lowenfeld’s criticisms. Lowenfeld himself, though never an adherent to
Freud’s views, ultimately became much more favourable to them. Cf.
the Editor’s Note to that paper, Standard Ed., 3, 121.]
2 [There is an allusion in this to Freud’s much more recent con­
troversies with Adler and Jung, especially in his ‘History of the PsychoAnalytic Movement’ (1914c/).]

246

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

can one do, in the face of these contradictory objections by the
critics, but remain as one is and behave in accordance with
one’s own judgement? I am resolved to do that, and I shall not
be deterred from modifying or withdrawing any of my theories,
as my advancing experience may require. In regard to funda­
mental discoveries I have hitherto found nothing to alter, and I
hope this will remain true in the future.1
I am to put before you, then, the psycho-analytic view of the
phenomena of neurosis. In doing so, the best plan would seem
to be to make a start in connection with the phenomena we
have already dealt with, for the sake both of analogy and
contrast; and I will begin with a symptomatic action [p. 61]
which I have seen many people perform during my consulting
hours. We analysts cannot do much for the people who come
to us in our consulting-room to lay before us in a quarter of an
hour the miseries of a long lifetime. Our deeper knowledge
makes it difficult for us to give the kind of opinion another
doctor would—‘There’s nothing wrong with you’—with the
added advice: ‘You should arrange for a mild hydropathic
treatment.’ One of my colleagues who was asked what he did
with his consultation patients shrugged his shoulders and
replied: ‘I fine them so-and-so many Kronen for a frivolous
waste of time.’ So you will not be surprised to hear that even in
the case of busy psycho-analysts their consulting hours are not
apt to be very lively. I have had the ordinary door between my
waiting-room and my consulting- and treatment-room doubled
1 [Perhaps the chief change in Freud’s views up to the time of this
lecture had been his abandonment of the purely traumatic causation of
the neuroses and his insistence instead on the importance of the innate
instinctual forces and on the great part played by phantasies. On this
see his paper on the part played by sexuality in the neuroses (1906a),
Standard Ed., 7, 273-8. Later on there were, of course, to be further
important changes in his views—for instance on the nature of anxiety
(cf. Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety (1926d), ibid., 20, 157 ff.) and on
the sexual development of women (cf. the Editor’s Note to ‘Some
Psychical Consequences of the Anatomical Distinction between the
Sexes’ (1925;), ibid., 19, 243 ff.). But what lay ahead above all were a
revision of the theory of the instincts in Beyond the Pleasure Principle
(192Q?) and a new structural picture of the mind in The Ego and the Id
(19236). All these changes were to be discussed fifteen years later in the
New Introductory Lectures (1933a).]

XVI. PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND PSYCHIATRY

247

and given a baize lining. There can be no doubt about the
purpose of this arrangement. Now it constantly happens that a
person whom I have brought in from the waiting-room omits
to shut the door behind him and almost always he leaves both
doors open. As soon as I notice this I insist in a rather unfriendly
tone on his or her going back and making good the omission—
even if the person concerned is a well-dressed gentleman or a
fashionable lady. This makes an impression of uncalled-for
pedantry. Occasionally, too, I have put myself in a foolish
position by making this request when it has turned out to be a
person who cannot touch a door-handle himself and is glad if
someone with him spares him the necessity. But in the majority
of cases I have been right; for anyone who behaves like this and
leaves the door open between a doctor’s waiting-room and
consulting-room is ill-mannered and deserves an unfriendly
reception. But do not take sides over this till you have heard the
sequel. For this carelessness on the part of the patient only
occurs when he has been alone in the waiting-room and has
therefore left an empty room behind him; it never happens if
other people, strangers to him, have been waiting with him. In
this latter case he knows quite well that it is in his interest not
to be overheard while he is talking to the doctor, and he never
fails to shut both the doors carefully.
Thus the patient’s omission is neither accidentally nor sense­
lessly determined; and indeed it is not unimportant, for, as we
shall see, it throws light on the newcomer’s attitude to the
doctor. The patient is one of the great multitude who have a
craving for mundane authority, who wish to be dazzled and
intimidated. He may have enquired on the telephone as to the
hour at which he could most easily get an appointment; he had
formed a picture of a crowd of people seeking for help, like the
crowd outside one of Julius Meinl’s branches.1 He now comes
into an empty, and moreover extremely modestly furnished,
waiting-room, and is shocked. He has to make the doctor pay
for the superfluous respect which he had intended to offer him:
so—he omits to shut the door between the waiting-room and
the consulting-room. What he means to say to the doctor by his
conduct is: ‘Ah, so there’s no one here and no one’s likely to
1 [The war-time queue outside one of the popular Austrian grocery
chain-stores.]

248

.
1

,
1

.

■

]
’
t

i

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

come while I’m here.’ He would behave equally impolitely and
disrespectfully during the consultation if his arrogance were not
given a sharp reprimand at the very beginning.
The analysis of this small symptomatic action tells you no­
thing you did not know before: the thesis that it was not a
matter of chance but had a motive, a sense and an intention,
that it had a place in an assignable mental context and that it
provided information, by a small indication, of a more important mental process. But, more than anything else, it tells you
that the process thus indicated was unknown to the consciousness of the person who carried out the action, since none of the
patients who left the two doors open would have been able to
admit that by this omission he wanted to give evidence of his
contempt. Some of them would probably have been aware of a
sense of disappointment when they entered the empty waiting­
room; but the connection between this impression and the
symptomatic action which followed certainly remained un­
known to their consciousness.
Beside this small analysis of a symptomatic action we will
now place an observation on a patient. I choose this one
because it is fresh in my memory, but also because it can be
reported comparatively briefly. A certain amount of detail is
indispensable in any such account.
A young officer, home on short leave, asked me to undertake
the treatment of his mother-in-law, who, though in the hap­
piest circumstances, was embittering her own life and the lives
of her relatives through an absurd idea. In this way I made the
acquaintance of a well-preserved lady of fifty-three, friendly
and simple in her nature, who told me the following story
without any reluctance. She lived in the country, most happily
married, with her husband, who was at the head of a large
factory. She could not give enough praise to her husband’s
affectionate solicitude. It had been a love-match thirty years
ago, and since then there had never been any trouble, discord
or cause for jealousy. Her two children were happily married;
her husband (and their father), out of a sense of duty, was not
yet willing to retire. A year before, she had received an anony­
mous letter accusing her excellent husband of a love affair with
a young girl; and the incredible—and to herself unintelligible

XVI. PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND PSYCHIATRY

249

—result was that she immediately believed it, and since then
her happiness had been destroyed. The course of events, in
greater detail, was something like this. She had a housemaid
with whom she used, perhaps too often, to have intimate talks.
This girl pursued another one with a positively malicious hos­
tility because she had done so much better for herself in life,
though she was of no higher origin. Instead of going into ser­
vice, this other girl had managed to get a commercial training,
had entered the factory and, as a result of shortness of personnel,
owing to members of the staff being called up for military
service, she was promoted to a good position. She now lived
in the factory itself, had social relations with all the gentlemen
and was actually addressed as‘Fraulein’. The girl who had made
less of a success in life was of course ready to repeat all kinds of
bad things of her former schoolmate. One day our lady had a
conversation with the housemaid about a gentleman who had
been staying with them, who was well known not to be living
with his wife but to be having an affair with another woman.
She did not know how it happened, but she suddenly said:
‘The most dreadful thing that could happen to me would be if
I were to learn that my dear husband was having an affair too.’
The next day she received an anonymous letter by post which,
as though by magic, gave her this very information, written in
a disguised hand. She decided, probably rightly, that the letter
was the work of the malicious housemaid, since it specified as
her husband’s mistress the girl whom the servant pursued with
her hatred. But although she at once saw through the intrigue
and had seen enough instances where she lived of how little
credence such cowardly denunciations deserved, what hap­
pened was that the letter instantly prostrated her. She became
terribly excited, sent for her husband at once and reproached
him violently. Her husband laughed the accusation off and did
the best possible thing. He brought in the family doctor (who
was also the factory doctor) who made efforts to soothe the
unfortunate lady. The further conduct of both of them was also
entirely sensible. The housemaid was dismissed, but the alleged
rival was not. Since then the patient had repeatedly been
pacified to the point of no longer believing the content of the
anonymous letter, but never thoroughly and never for long. It
was enough for her to hear the young lady’s name mentioned or

S'

250

j
I
!

1

I
■

;

r
|

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

to meet her in the street and a fresh attack of distrust, pain and
reproaches would burst out in her.
This, then, is the case history of this excellent woman. Not
much psychiatric experience was needed to understand that,
in contrast to other neurotics, she was giving too mild an
account of her case—that she was, as we say, dissimulating—
and that she had never really got over her belief in the accusa­
tion contained in the anonymous letter.
What attitude, then, will a psychiatrist adopt in a case of
illness like this? We know already how he would behave to the
symptomatic action of the patient who fails to shut the con­
sulting-room door. He pronounces it to be a chance event of no
psychological interest with which he has no further concern.
But this procedure cannot be carried over to the illness of the
jealous woman. The symptomatic action seems to be a matter
of indifference; but the symptom forces itself on our attention
as a matter of importance. It is accompanied by intense sub­
jective suffering and, as an objective fact, it threatens the
communal life of a family; it is thus an undeniable subject of
psychiatric interest. The psychiatrist will start by endeavouring
to characterize the symptom by some essential feature. The
idea with which the woman torments herself cannot in itself
be called absurd; it does, indeed, happen that elderly gentlemen
have love affairs with young girls. But there is something else
about it which is absurd and hard to understand. The patient
had no other reason at all for believing that her affectionate
and loyal husband belonged to this otherwise not so rare class
of husbands except what was asserted in the anonymous letter.
She knew that this document had no evidential value and she
was able to give a satisfying explanation of its origin. She ought
therefore to have been able to tell herself that she had no ground
whatever for her jealousy, and she did tell herself so. But in
spite of this she suffered as much as if she regarded this jealousy
as completely justified. Ideas of this kind, which are inaccessible
to logical arguments based on reality, are by general agreement
described as delusions. The good lady, then, was suffering from
delusions ofjealousy. This is no doubt the essential feature of this
case of illness.
After this first point has been established our psychiatric
interest will become even livelier. If a delusion is not to be got

XVI. PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND PSYCHIATRY

251

rid of by a reference to reality, no doubt it did not originate
from reality either. Where else did it originate? There are
delusions of the most varied content: why in our case is the
content of the delusion jealousy in particular? In what kind of
people do delusions, and especially delusions of jealousy, come
about? We should like to hear what the psychiatrist has to say
about this; but at this point he leaves us in the lurch. He enters
into only a single one of our enquiries. He will investigate the
woman’s family history and will perhaps give us this reply:
‘Delusions come about in people in whose families similar and
other psychical disorders have repeatedly occurred.’ In other
words, if this woman developed a delusion she was predisposed
to it by hereditary transmission. No doubt that is something;
but is it all we want to know? Was this the oply thing that
contributed to the causation of the illness? Must we be content
to suppose that it is a matter of indifference or caprice or is
inexplicable whether a delusion of jealousy arises rather than
any other sort? And ought we to understand the assertion of the
predominance of the hereditary influence in a negative sense as
well—that no matter what experiences this woman’s mind
encountered she was destined some time or other to produce a
delusion? You will want to know why it is that scientific psy­
chiatry will give us no further information. But my reply to you
is: ‘he is a rogue who gives more than he has.’ The psychiatrist
knows no way of throwing more light on a case like this one. He
must content himself with a diagnosis and a prognosis—un­
certain in spite of a wealth of experience—of its future course.
But can psycho-analysis do more here? Yes, it actually can.
I hope to be able to show you that, even in a case so hard of
access as this, it can discover something which makes a first
understanding possible. And to begin with I would draw your
attention to the inconspicuous detail that the patient herself
positively provoked the anonymous letter, which now gave
support to her delusion, by informing the scheming housemaid
on the previous day that it would cause her the greatest un­
happiness if her husband had a love affair with a young girl. In
this way she first put the notion of sending the anonymous
letter into the housemaid’s head. Thus the delusion acquires a
certain independence of the letter; it had been present already
in the patient as a fear—or was it as a wish? Let us now add to
f. xvi—R

!
i

252

I

;
'
i
'
|
I
j

’

'

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

this the small further indications yielded by only two analytic
sessions. The patient, indeed, behaved in a very unco-operative
way when, after telling me her story, she was asked for her
further thoughts, ideas and memories. She said that nothing
occurred to her, that she had told me everything already, and
after two sessions the experiment with me had in fact to be
broken off because she announced that she already felt well and
that she was sure the pathological idea would not come back.
She only said this, of course, from resistance and from dread of
the continuation of the analysis. Nevertheless, during these two
sessions she let fall a few remarks which allowed of, and indeed
necessitated, a particular interpretation; and this interpretation
threw a clear light on the genesis of her delusion of jealousy.
She herself was intensely in love with a young man, with the
same son-in-law who had persuaded her to come to me as a
patient. She herself knew nothing, or perhaps only a very little,
of this love; in the family relationship that existed between
them it was easy for this passionate liking to disguise itself as
innocent affection. After all our experiences elsewhere, it is not
hard for us to feel our way into the mental life of this upright
wife and worthy mother, of the age of fifty-three. Being in love
like this, a monstrous and impossible thing, could not become
conscious; but it remained in existence and, even though it was
unconscious, it exercised a severe pressure. Something had to
become of it, some relief had to be looked for; and the easiest
mitigation was offered, no doubt, by the mechanism of dis­
placement which plays a part so regularly in the generating of
delusional jealousy. If not only were she, the old woman, in
love with a young man, but if also her old husband were having
a love affair with a young girl, then her conscience would be
relieved of the weight of her unfaithfulness. The phantasy of
her husband’s unfaithfulness thus acted as a cooling compress
on her burning wound. Her own love had not become con­
scious to her, but its mirror-reflection, which brought her such
an advantage, now became conscious as an obsession and delu­
sion. No arguments against it could, of course, have any effect,
for they were only directed against the mirror-image and not
against the original which gave the other its strength and which
lay hidden, inviolable, in the unconscious.
Let us now bring together what this effort at a psycho-

XVI. PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND PSYCHIATRY

253

analysis, short and impeded as it was, has brought to light for
an understanding of this case—assuming, of course, that our
enquiries were correctly carried out, which I cannot here sub­
mit to your judgement. Firstly, the delusion has ceased to be
absurd or unintelligible; it had a sense, it had good motives and
it fitted into the context of an emotional experience of the
patient’s. Secondly, the delusion was necessary, as a reaction to
an unconscious mental process which we have inferred from
other indications, and it was precisely to this connection that it
owed its delusional character and its resistance to every logical
and realistic attack. It itself was something desired, a kind of
consolation. Thirdly, the fact that the delusion turned out to be
precisely a jealous one and not one of another kind was un­
ambiguously determined by the experience that lay behind the
illness.1 You recall of course that, the day before, she had told
the scheming maid that the most dreadful thing that could
happen to her would be her husband’s unfaithfulness. Nor will
you have overlooked the two important analogies between this
case and the symptomatic action which we analysed—the
explanation of its sense or intention and its relation to something
unconscious that was involved in the situation.
Naturally this does not answer all the questions that we
might ask in connection with this case. On the contrary, the
case bristles with further problems—some that have in general
not yet become soluble and others which could not be solved
owing to the particular circumstances being unfavourable. For
instance, why did this lady who was happily married fall in love
with her son-in-law? and why did the relief, which might have
been possible in other ways, take the form of this mirror-image,
this projection of her state on to her husband? You must not
think it is otiose or frivolous to raise such questions. We already
have some material at our disposal which might possibly serve
to answer them. The lady was at a critical age, at which sexual
needs in women suffer a sudden and undesired increase; that
alone might account for the event. Or it may further have been
that her excellent and faithful husband had for some years no
longer enjoyed the sexual capacity which the well-preserved
woman required for her satisfaction. Experience has shown us
1 [This sentence occurs in a less clear form in some of the earlier
German editions.]

254

।
<

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

that it is precisely men in this position, whose faithfulness can
consequently be taken for granted, who are distinguished by
treating their wives with unusual tenderness, and by showing
particular forbearance for their nervous troubles. Or, again,
it may not be without significance that the object of this pathogenic love was precisely the young husband of one of her daugh­
ters. A powerful erotic tie with a daughter, which goes back in
the last resort to the mother’s sexual constitution, often finds a
way of persisting in a transformation of this sort. In this con­
nection I may perhaps remind you that the relation between
mother-in-law and son-in-law has been regarded from the
earliest times of the human race as a particularly awkward one
and that among primitive people it has given rise to very
powerful taboo regulations and ‘avoidances’.1 The relation is
frequently excessive by civilized standards both in a positive
and negative direction. Which of these three factors became
operative in our case, or whether two of them or perhaps all
three came together, I cannot, it is true, tell you; but that is
only because I was not permitted to continue the analysis of the
case for more than two sessions.

i

j

I

t

I notice now, Gentlemen, that I have been talking to you
about a number of things which you are not yet prepared to
understand. I did so in order to carry out the comparison
between psychiatry and psycho-analysis. But there is one thing
that I can ask you now. Have you observed any sign of a con­
tradiction between them? Psychiatry does not employ the
technical methods of psycho-analysis; it omits to make any
inferences from the content of the delusion, and, in pointing to
heredity, it gives us a very general and remote aetiology instead
of indicating first the more special and proximate causes. But
is there a contradiction, an opposition in this? Is it not rather a
case of one supplementing the other? Does the hereditary factor
contradict the importance of experience? Do not the two things
rather combine in the most effective manner? You will grant
that there is nothing in the nature of psychiatric work which
could be opposed to psycho-analytic research. What is opposed
to psycho-analysis is not psychiatry but psychiatrists. Psycho1 See my Totem and Taboo (1912-13) [Essay I, Standard Ed., 13,
12 ff.].

XVI. PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND PSYCHIATRY

4

1

j

i
1
।

(

।
'
।

1
|

*
i

255

analysis is related to psychiatry approximately as histology is to
anatomy: the one studies the external forms of the organs, the
other studies their construction out of tissues and cells. It is not
easy to imagine a contradiction between these two species of
study, of which one is a continuation of the other. To-day, as
you know, anatomy is regarded by us as the foundation of
scientific medicine. But there was a time when it was as much
forbidden to dissect the human cadaver in order to discover the
internal structure of the body as it now seems to be to practise
psycho-analysis in order to learn about the internal mechanism
of the mind. It is to be expected that in the not too distant
future it will be realized that a scientifically based psychiatry
is not possible without a sound knowledge of the deeper-lying
unconscious processes in mental life.
Perhaps, however, the much-abused psycho-analysis has
friends among you who will be pleased if it can be justified from
another direction—from the therapeutic side. As you know,
our psychiatric therapy is not hitherto able to influence delu­
sions. Is it possible, perhaps, that psycho-analysis can do so,
thanks to its insight into the mechanism of these symptoms? No,
Gentlemen, it cannot. It is as powerless (for the time being at
least) against these ailments as any other form of therapy. We
can understand, indeed, what has happened in the patient, but
we have no means of making the patient himself understand it.
You have heard how I was unable to pursue the analysis of this
delusion beyond a first beginning. Will you be inclined to main­
tain on that account that an analysis of such cases is to be
rejected because it is fruitless? I think not. We have a right, or
rather a duty, to carry on our research without consideration of
any immediate beneficial effect. In the end—we cannot tell
where or when—every little fragment of knowledge will be
transformed into power, and into therapeutic power as well.
Even if psycho-analysis showed itself as unsuccessful in every
other form of nervous and psychical disease as it does in delu­
sions, it would still remain completely justified as an irreplaceable instrument of scientific research. It is true that in that case
we should not be in a position to practise it. The human
material on which we seek to learn, which lives, has its own will
and needs its motives for co-operating in our work, would hold
back from us. Let me therefore end my remarks to-day by

256

'
■i
}
J

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

informing you that there are extensive groups of nervous disorders in which the transformation of our better understanding
into therapeutic power has actually taken place, and that in
these illnesses, which are difficult of access by other means, we
achieve, under favourable conditions, successes which are
second to no others in the field of internal medicine.1
1 [Psycho-analysis as a method of psychotherapy is the subject of the
last lecture of the series (XXVIII).]

1
I

LECTURE XVII

THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS
Ladies and Gentlemen,—In the last lecture I explained to you
that clinical psychiatry takes little notice of the outward form
or content of individual symptoms, but that psycho-analysis
takes matters up at precisely that point and has established in
the first place the fact that symptoms have a sense and are re­
lated to the patient’s experiences. The sense of neurotic symp­
toms was first discovered by Josef Breuer from his study and
successful cure (between 1880 and 1882) of a case of hysteria
which has since become famous. It is true that Pierre Janet
brought forward the same evidence independently; indeed, the
French worker can claim priority of publication, for it was only
a decade later (in 1893 and 1895), while he was collaborating
with me, that Breuer published his observation. In any case it
may seem a matter of some indifference who made the dis­
covery, for, as you know, every discovery is made more than
once and none is made all at once. And, apart from this, suc­
cess does not always go along with merit: America is not named
after Columbus. The great psychiatrist Leuret1 gave it as his
opinion, before Breuer and Janet, that even the delusional
ideas of the insane would certainly be found to have a sense if
only we understood how to translate them. I must admit that
for a long time I was prepared to give Janet very great credit
for throwing light on neurotic symptoms, because he regarded
them as expressions of idees inconscientes which dominated the
patients.2 But since then he has expressed himself with exag­
gerated reserve, as if he wanted to admit that the unconscious
had been nothing more to him than a form of words, a make­
shift, unefa$on de parler—that he had meant nothing real by it.8
Since then I have ceased to understand Janet’s writings; but I
think he has unnecessarily forfeited much credit.
Thus neurotic symptoms have a sense, like parapraxes and
1 [Francois Leuret (1797-1851). (Leuret, 1834, 131.)]
8 [See, for example, Janet, 1888.]
8 [For the gist of this see Janet, 1913, 39.]
257

I

258

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES •

dreams, and, like them, have a connection with the life of those
who produce them. I should now like to make this important
discovery plainer to you by a few examples. I can indeed only
assert, I cannot prove, that it is always and in every instance so.
Anyone who looks for experiences himself, will find convincing
evidence. But for certain reasons I shall choose these examples
from cases not of hysteria but of another, highly remarkable
neurosis which is fundamentally very much akin to it and about
which I have a few introductory remarks to make.

This neurosis, known as ‘obsessional neurosis’, is not so
popular as the universally familiar hysteria. It is not, if I may
express myself thus, so obtrusively noisy, it behaves more like
a private affair of the patient’s, it dispenses almost entirely with
somatic phenomena, and creates all its symptoms in the mental
sphere. Obsessional neurosis and hysteria are the forms of
neurotic illness upon the study of which psycho-analysis was
first built, and in the treatment of which, too, our therapy cele­
brates its triumphs. But obsessional neurosis, in which the
puzzling leap from the mental to the physical plays no part, has
actually, through the efforts of psycho-analysis, become more
perspicuous and familiar to us than hysteria, and we have
learnt that it displays certain extreme characteristics of the
nature of neurosis far more glaringly.
Obsessional neurosis is shown in the patient’s being occupied
with thoughts in which he is in fact not interested, in his being
aware of impulses in himself which appear very strange to him
and in his being led to actions the performance of which give
him no enjoyment, but which it is quite impossible for him to
omit. The thoughts (obsessions) may be senseless in themselves,
or merely a matter of indifference to the subject; often they are
completely silly, and invariably they are the starting-point of a
strenuous mental activity, which exhausts the patient and to
which he only surrenders himself most unwillingly. He is
obliged against his will to brood and speculate as though it were
a question of his most important vital problems. The impulses
which the patient is aware of in himself may also make a
childish and senseless impression; but as a rule they have a con­
tent of the most frightful kind, tempting him, for instance, to
commit serious crimes, so that he not merely disavows them as

XVII. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS

259

alien to himself, but flies from them in horror and protects himself from carrying them out by prohibitions, renunciations and
restrictions upon his freedom. At the same time, these impulses
never—literally never—force their way through to perform­
ance; the outcome lies always in victory for the flight and the
precautions. What the patient actually carries out—his socalled obsessional actions—are very harmless and certainly
trivial things, for the most part repetitions or ceremonial
elaborations of the activities of ordinary life. But these necessary
activities (such as going to bed, washing, dressing or going for a
walk) become extremely tedious and almost insoluble tasks. In
different forms and cases of obsessional neurosis the pathological
ideas, impulses and actions are not combined in equal propor­
tions; it is the rule, rather, that one or other of these factors
dominates the picture and gives its name to the illness, but the
common element in all these forms is sufficiently unmistakable.
Certainly this is a crazy illness. The most extravagant psychiatric imagination would not, I think, have succeeded in con­
structing anything like it; and if one did not see it before one
every day one would never bring oneself to believe in it. Do not
suppose, however, that you will help the patient in the least by
calling on him to take a new line, to cease to occupy himself
with such foolish thoughts and to do something sensible instead
of his childish pranks. He would like to do so himself, for he is
completely clear in his head, shares your opinion of his obses­
sional symptoms and even puts it forward to you spontaneously.
Only he cannot help himself. What is carried into action in an
obsessional neurosis is sustained by an energy to which we probably know nothing comparable in normal mental life. There is
only one thing he can do: he can make displacements, and ex­
changes, he can replace one foolish idea by another somewhat
milder, he can proceed from one precaution or prohibition to
another, instead of one ceremonial he can perform another. He
can displace the obsession but not remove it. The ability to displace any symptom into something far removed from its original
conformation is a main characteristic of his illness. Moreover it
is a striking fact that in his condition the contradictions (polari­
ties) with which mental life is interlaced [cf. p. 301 below]
emerge especially sharply differentiated. Alongside of obsessions
with a positive and negative content, doubt makes itself felt in

j,
I1
'

■
;

[
I

.
,
f

।

(

।
\
I
i

'
I
:
■

I

260

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

the intellectual field and little by little it begins to gnaw even at
what is usually most certain. The whole position ends up in an
ever-increasing degree of indecision, loss of energy and restric­
tion of freedom. At the same time, the obsessional neurotic
starts off with a very energetic disposition, he is often extra­
ordinarily self-willed and as a rule he has intellectual gifts
above the average. He has usually reached a satisfactorily high
level of ethical development; he exhibits over-conscientious­
ness, and is more than ordinarily correct in his behaviour. You
can imagine that no small amount of work is needed before one
can make one’s way any distance into this contradictory hotch­
potch of character-traits and symptoms. And to begin with we
aim at nothing whatever else than understanding a few of the
symptoms and being able to interpret them.
Perhaps you would like to know in advance, having in mind
our earlier talks, what attitude contemporary psychiatry adopts
towards the problems of obsessional neurosis. But it is a meagre
chapter. Psychiatry gives names to the different obsessions but
says nothing further about them. On the other hand it insists
that those who suffer from these symptoms are ‘degenerates’.
This gives small satisfaction; in fact it is a judgement of value—
a condemnation instead of an explanation. We are supposed to
think that every possible sort of eccentricity may arise in de­
generates. Well, it is true that we must regard those who
develop such symptoms as somewhat different in their nature
from other people. But we may ask: are they more ‘degenerate’
than other neurotics—than hysterical patients, for instance, or
those who fall ill of psychoses? Once again, the characterization
is evidently too general. Indeed, we may doubt whether there
is any justification for it at all, when we learn that such symp­
toms occur too in distinguished people of particularly high
capacities, capacities important for the world at large. It is
true that, thanks to their own discretion and to the untruthful­
ness of their biographers, we learn little that is intimate about
the great men who are our models; but it may nevertheless
happen that one of them, like £ mile Zola, may be a fanatic for
the truth, and we then learn from him of the many strange
obsessional habits to which he was a life-long victim.1
Psychiatry has found a way out by speaking of ‘degenMs
1E. Toulouse, Emile Z0^ enquSte midico-psychologiqw, Paris, 1896.

j

XVII. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS

261

superieurs1. Very nice. But we have found from psycho-analysis
that it is possible to get permanently rid of these strange obsessional symptoms, just as of other complaints and just as in
people who are not degenerate. I myself have succeeded re­
peatedly in this.1
I shall give you only two examples of the analysis of an
obsessional symptom: one an old observation which I cannot
find a better one to replace, and another recently met with. I
limit myself to this small number, because it is impossible in
such reports to avoid being very diffuse and entering into every
detail.
A lady, nearly thirty years of age, who suffered from the most
severe obsessional manifestations and whom I might perhaps
have helped if a malicious chance had not brought my work to
nothing—I may be able to tell you more about this later on—
performed (among others) the following remarkable obsessional
action many times a day. She ran from her room into another
neighbouring one, took up a particular position there beside a
table that stood in the middle, rang the bell for her housemaid,
sent her on some indifferent errand or let her go without one,
and then ran back into her own room. This was certainly not a
very distressing symptom, but was nevertheless calculated to
excite curiosity. The explanation was reached in the most un­
equivocal and unobjectionable manner, free from any possible
contribution on the doctor’s part. I cannot see how I could
possibly have formed any suspicion of the sense of this obses­
sional action or could have offered any suggestion on how it was
to be interpreted. Whenever I asked the patient ‘Why do you
do that? What sense has it?’ she answered: ‘I don’t know.’ But
one day, after I had succeeded in defeating a major, funda­
mental doubt of hers, she suddenly knew the answer and told
me what it was that was connected with the obsessional action.
More than ten years before, she had married a man very much
older than herself, and on the wedding-night he was impotent.
1 [Freud probably discussed obsessional neurosis more often than any
other disorder—from the beginning of his career almost to the end of it.
A list of some of the more important references will be found in an
Appendix to his ‘Notes upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis’ (1909<f),
Standard Ed., 10, 319-20.]

i
I
'

i

।
,
|

262

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

Many times during the night he had come running from his
room into hers to try once more, but every time without success.
Next morning he had said angrily: ‘I should feel ashamed in
front of the housemaid when she makes the bed,’ took up a
bottle of red ink that happened to be in the room and poured
its contents over the sheet, but not on the exact place where a
stain would have been appropriate. I could not understand at
first what this recollection had to do with the obsessional action
in question; the only resemblance I could find was in the re­
peated running from one room into the other, and perhaps also
in the entrance of the housemaid. My patient then led me up
to the table in the second room and showed me a big stain on
the tablecloth. She further explained that she took up her posi­
tion in relation to the table in such a way that the maid who
had been sent for could not fail to see the stain. There could
no longer be any doubt of the intimate connection between
the scene on her wedding-night and her present obsessional
action, though all kinds of other things remained to be learnt.
It was clear, in the first place, that the patient was identifying
herself with her husband; she was playing his part by imitating
his running from one room into the other. Further, to carry on
the analogy, we must agree that the bed and the sheet were re­
placed by the table and the tablecloth. This might seem arbi­
trary, but surely we have not studied dream-symbolism to no
purpose. In dreams too we often find a table which has to be
interpreted as a bed. Table and bed1 together stand for mar­
riage, so that the one can easily take the place of the other.
It already seems proved that the obsessional action had a
sense; it appears to have been a representation, a repetition, of
the significant scene. But we are not obliged to come to a halt
here. If we examine the relation between the two more closely,
we shall probably obtain information about something that
goes further—about the intention of the obsessional action. Its
kernel was obviously the summoning of the housemaid, before
whose eyes the patient displayed the stain, in contrast to her
husband’s remark that he would feel ashamed in front of the
maid. Thus he, whose part she was playing, did not feel
ashamed in front of the maid; accordingly the stain was in the
1 [The English phrase is ‘bed and board’, which is itself a translation
of a law-Latin term for marriage.]

XVII. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS

263

right place. We see, therefore, that she was not simply repeating
the scene, she was continuing and at the same time correcting
it; she was putting it right. But by this she was also correcting
the other thing, which had been so distressing that night and
had made the expedient with the red ink necessary—his im­
potence. So the obsessional action was saying: ‘No, it’s not true.
He had no need to feel ashamed in front of the housemaid; he
was not impotent.’ It represented this wish, in the manner of a
dream, as fulfilled in a present-day action; it served the purpose
of making her husband superior to his past mishap.
Everything I could tell you about this woman fits in with
this. Or, more correctly speaking, everything else we know
about her points the way to this interpretation of what was in
itself an unintelligible obsessional action. The woman had,been
living apart from her husband for years and was struggling with
an intention to obtain a legal divorce. But there was no question
of her being free of him; she was forced to remain faithful to
him; she withdrew from the world so as not to be tempted; she
exculpated and magnified his nature in her imagination. In­
deed, the deepest secret of her illness was that by means of it
she protected her husband from malicious gossip, justified her
separation from him and enabled him to lead a comfortable
separate life. Thus the analysis of a harmless obsessional action
led directly to the inmost core of an illness, but at the same
time betrayed to us no small part of the secret of obsessional
neurosis in general. I am glad to let you dwell a little on this
example because it combines conditions which we could not
fairly expect to find in every case. Here the interpretation of the
symptom was discovered by the patient herself at a single blow,
without any prompting or intervention on the analyst’s part;
and it resulted from a connection with an event which did not
(as is usually the case) belong to a forgotten period of child­
hood, but which had happened in the patient’s adult life and
had remained undimmed in her memory. All the objections
which criticism is normally in the habit of raising against our
interpretation of symptoms fall to the ground in this particular
case. We cannot hope always to have such good luck.1
1 [Freud had given a shorter account of this case, though with some
further details, in his paper on ‘Obsessive Actions and Religious
Practices’ (19076), Standard Ed., 9, 120-2.]

264

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

And one thing more. Were you not struck by the way in
which this unobtrusive obsessional action has led us into the in­
timacies of the patient’s life? A woman cannot have anything
much more intimate to tell than the story of her wedding-night.
Is it a matter of chance and of no further significance that we
have arrived precisely at the intimacies of sexual life? No doubt
it might be the result of the choice I have made on this occasion.
Do not let us be too hasty in forming our judgement, and let us
turn to my second example, which is of quite a different kind—
a sample of a very common species, a sleep-ceremonial.

A nineteen-year-old girl, well developed and gifted, was the
only child of parents to whom she was superior in education and
intellectual liveliness. As a child she had been wild and highspirited, and in the course of the last few years had changed,
without any visible cause, into a neurotic. She was very irrit­
able, particularly towards her mother, always dissatisfied and
depressed, and inclined to indecisiveness and doubt; finally
she admitted that she was no longer able to walk by herself
across squares or along comparatively wide streets. We will not
concern ourselves much with her complicated illness, which
called for at least two diagnoses—agoraphobia and obsessional
neurosis—but will dwell only on the fact that she also de­
veloped a sleep-ceremonial, with which she tormented her
parents. In a certain sense it may be said that every normal
person has his sleep-ceremonial or that he has established cer­
tain necessary conditions the non-fulfilment of which interferes
with his going to sleep; he has imposed certain forms on the
transition from the waking to the sleeping state and repeats
them in the same manner every evening. But everything that a
healthy person requires as a necessary condition for sleep can be
understood rationally, and if external circumstances call for a
change he will comply easily and without waste of time. A
pathological ceremonial, however, is unyielding and insists on
being carried through, even at the cost of great sacrifices; it too
is screened by having a rational basis and at a superficial glance
seems to diverge from the normal only by a certain exaggerated
meticulousness. On closer examination, nevertheless, we can see
that the screen is insufficient, that the ceremonial comprises
some stipulations which go far beyond its rational basis and

)

XVII. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS

।
।

others which positively run counter to it. Our present patient
put forward as a pretext for her nightly precautions that she
needed quiet in order to sleep and must exclude every source
of noise. With that end in view she did two kinds of things. The
big clock in her room was stopped, all the other clocks or
watches in the room were removed, and her tiny wrist-watch
was not allowed even to be inside her bedside table. Flower-pots
and vases were collected on the writing-table so that they might
not fall over in the night and break, and disturb her in her
sleep. She was aware that these measures could find only an
ostensible justification in the rule in favour of quiet: the ticking
of the little watch would not have been audible even if it had
been left lying on the top of the bedside table, and we have all
had experience of the fact that the regular ticking of a pen­
dulum-clock never disturbs sleep but acts, rather, as a soporific.
She admitted too that her fear that flower-pots and vases, if
they were left in their places, might fall over and break of their
own accord lacked all plausibility. In the case of other stipula­
tions made by the ceremonial the need for quiet was dropped as
a basis. Indeed, the requirement that the door between her
room and her parents’ bedroom should stay half-open—the
fulfilment of which she ensured by placing various objects in
the open doorway—seemed on the contrary to act as a source of
disturbing noises. But the most important stipulations related
to the bed itself. The pillow at the top end of the bed must
not touch the wooden back of the bedstead. The small top­
pillow must lie on this large pillow in one specific way only
—namely, so as to form a diamond shape. Her head had
then to lie exactly along the long diameter of the diamond.
The eiderdown (or ‘Duchent’ as we call it in Austria1) had to
be shaken before being laid on the bed so that its bottom
end became very thick; afterwards, however, she never failed
to even out this accumulation of feathers by pressing them
apart.
With your leave I will pass over the remaining, often very
trivial, details of the ceremonial; they would teach us nothing
new, and would lead us too far afield from our aims. But you

‘

,

265

1 [Elsewhere in Germany the French word ‘duvet’ is usual. This object
is normally an undivided bag of feathers, not, as in England, quilted
into a number of separate compartments.]

r
266

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

must not overlook the fact that all this was not carried out
smoothly. There was always an apprehension that things might
not have been done properly. Everything must be checked and
repeated, doubts assailed first one and then another of the
safety measures, and the result was that one or two hours were
spent, during which the girl herself could not sleep and would
not allow her intimidated parents to sleep either.
The analysis of these torments did not proceed so simply as
that of our earlier patient’s obsessional action. I was obliged
to give the girl hints and propose interpretations, which were
always rejected with a decided ‘no’ or accepted with con­
temptuous doubt. But after this first reaction of rejection there
followed a time during which she occupied herself with the
possibilities put before her, collected associations to them, pro­
duced recollections and made connections, until by her own
work she had accepted all the interpretations. In proportion as
this happened, she relaxed the performance of her obsessional
measures, and even before the end of the treatment she had
given up the whole ceremonial. You must understand, too, that
the work of analysis as we carry it out to-day quite excludes the
systematic treatment of any individual symptom till it has been
entirely cleared up. We are, on the contrary, obliged to keep
on leaving any particular topic, in the certain expectation of
coming back to it again in other connections. The interpretation
of her symptoms which I am about to give you is accordingly a
synthesis of findings which were arrived at, interrupted by
other work, over a period of weeks and months.
Our patient gradually came to learn that it was as symbols of
the female genitals that clocks were banished from her equip­
ment for the night. Clocks and watches—though elsewhere we
have found other symbolic interpretations for them1—have
arrived at a genital role owing to their relation to periodic pro­
cesses and equal intervals of time. A woman may boast that her
menstruation behaves with the regularity of clockwork. Our
patient’s anxiety, however, was directed in particular against
being disturbed in her sleep by the ticking of a clock. The tick­
ing of a clock may be compared with the knocking or throbbing
1 [Another reason for the dislike of clocks and watches felt by
obsessional neurotics is mentioned in the ‘Rat Man* analysis (1909d),
Standard Ed., 10, 232.]

XVII. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS

267

in the clitoris during sexual excitement.1 She had in fact been
repeatedly woken from her sleep by this sensation, which had
now become distressing to her; and she gave expression to this
fear of an erection in the rule that all clocks and watches that
were going should be removed from her neighbourhood at
night. Flower-pots and vases, like all vessels [p. 156], are also
female symbols. Taking precautions against their falling and
being broken at night was thus not without its good sense. We
know the widespread custom of breaking a vessel or plate at
betrothal ceremonies. Each man present gets hold of a frag­
ment, and we may regard this as a sign of his resigning the
claims he had upon the bride in virtue of a marriage-regulation
dating from before the establishment of monogamy.12 In con­
nection with this part of her ceremonial the girl produced a
recollection and several associations. Once when she was a
child she had fallen down while she was carrying a glass or
china vase and had cut her finger and bled profusely. When she
grew up and came to know the facts about sexual intercourse
she formed an anxious idea that on her wedding-night she
would not bleed and would thus fail to show that she was a
virgin. Her precautions against vases being broken thus meant
a repudiation of the whole complex concerned with virginity
and bleeding at the first intercourse—a repudiation equally of
the fear of bleeding and of the contrary fear of not bleeding.
These precautions, which she subsumed under her avoidance
of noise, had only a remote connection with it.
She found out the central meaning of her ceremonial one
day when she suddenly understood the meaning of the rule that
the pillow must not touch the back of the bedstead. The pillow,
she said, had always been a woman to her and the upright
wooden back a man. Thus she wanted—by magic, we must
interpolate—to keep the man and woman apart—that is, to
separate her parents from each other, not to allow them to have
sexual intercourse. In earlier years, before she had established
the ceremonial, she had tried to achieve the same aim in a more
1 [Freud had reported a similar connection in his paper on a case of
paranoia (1915/), Standard Ed., 14, 270.]
2 [Cf. a reference to 'group marriage’ in Totem and Taboo (1912-13),
Standard Ed., 13, 7, and a discussion in ‘The Taboo of Virginity’ (1918a),
ibid., 11, 194 ff. and 196, footnote 2.]
S.F. xvi—s

I
J c

!

■
1
J
:
fl
'
|[
।
i
■
■
!
'
[
i
I
। [

!

i

||

'
।
J
>
>
•

ii

268

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

direct way. She had simulated fear (or had exploited a tendency
to fear which was already present) in order that the connecting
doors between her parents’ bedroom and the nursery should not
be shut. This rule had, indeed, been retained in her present
ceremonial. In that way she gave herself the opportunity of
listening to her parents, but in making use of it she brought on
an insomnia which lasted for months. Not satisfied with disturbing her parents by this means, she contrived to be allowed from
time to time to sleep in her parents’ bed between them. The
‘pillow’ and the ‘wooden back’ were thus really unable to come
together. Finally, when she was so big that it became physically
uncomfortable for her to find room in the bed between her
parents, she managed, by a conscious simulation of anxiety, to
arrange for her mother to exchange places with her for the night
and to leave her own place so that the patient could sleep beside
her father. This situation no doubt became the starting-point of
phantasies whose after-effect was to be seen in the ceremonial.
If a pillow was a woman, then the shaking of the eiderdown
till all the feathers were at the bottom and caused a swelling
there had a sense as well. It meant making a woman pregnant;
but she never failed to smooth away the pregnancy again, for
she had for years been afraid that her parents’ intercourse
would result in another child and so present her with a competitor. On the other hand, if the big pillow was a woman, the
mother, then the small top-pillow could only stand for the
daughter. Why did this pillow have to be placed diamond-wise
and her head precisely along its centre line? It was easy to re­
call to her that this diamond shape is the inscription scribbled
on every wall to represent the open female genitals. If so, she
herself was playing the man and replacing the male organ by
her head. (Cf. the symbolism of beheading for castrating.)1
Wild thoughts, you will say, to be running through an unmarried girl’s head. I admit that is so. But you must not forget
that I did not make these things but only interpreted them. A *
sleep-ceremonial like this is a strange thing too,2 and you will
1 [See Freud’s paper on this subject (1916c), which includes a short
reference to the present case, Standard Ed., 14, 339.]
* [An almost equally elaborate sleep-ceremonial had been reported
by Freud long before, in his second paper on the neuro-psychoses of
defence (18966), Standard Ed., 3, 172-3, footnote.]

XVII. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS

269

not fail to see how the ceremonial corresponds to the phantasies
which are revealed by the interpretation. But I attach more
importance to your noticing that what was seen in the cere­
monial was a precipitate not of a single phantasy but of a num­
ber of them, though they had a nodal point somewhere, and,
further, that the rules laid down by the ceremonial reproduced
the patient’s sexual wishes at one point positively and at another
negatively—in part they represented them, but in part they
served as a defence against them.
More could be made, too, of the analysis of this ceremonial if
it could be properly linked up with the patient’s other symp­
toms. But our path does not lead in that direction. You must be
content with a hint that the girl was in the grip of an erotic
attachment to her father whose beginnings went back to her
childhood. Perhaps that was why she behaved in such an un­
friendly way to her mother [p. 264]. Nor can we overlook the
fact that the analysis of this symptom has once again taken us
back to a patient’s' sexual life. We shall perhaps be less sur­
prised at this the more often we gain an insight into the sense
and intention of neurotic symptoms.

I have shown you, then, on the basis of two chosen examples,
that neurotic symptoms have a sense, like parapraxes and
dreams, and that they have an intimate connection with the
patient’s experiences. Can I expect you to believe this ex­
tremely important thesis on the evidence of two examples? No.
But can you require me to go on giving you further examples
till you declare yourselves convinced? No, once more. For, in
view of the detailed fashion in which I deal with each single
case, I should have to devote a five-hour course of lectures to
settling this one point in the theory of the neuroses. So I must
be content with having given you a trial proof of my assertion
and, for the rest, I refer you to the reports given in the literature
of the subject—to the classical interpretations of symptoms in
Breuer’s first case (of hysteria),1 to the striking light thrown
upon the most obscure symptoms of what is known as dementia
praecox by C. G. Jung [1907], at a time when he was merely a
psycho-analyst and had not yet aspired to be a prophet, and all
the other papers that have since than filled our periodicals.
1 [Included in Studies on Hysteria (\%Q5d), Standard Ed., 2, 21 ff.]

270

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

There has been no lack of investigations precisely on these lines.
The analysis, interpretation and translation of neurotic symp­
toms proved so attractive to psycho-analysts that for a time they
neglected the other problems of neurosis.
If any of you undertakes exertions of this kind, he will cer­
tainly gain a powerful impression of the wealth of evidential
material. But he will also come up against a difficulty. The sense
of a symptom lies, as we have found, in some connection with
the patient’s experience. The more individual is the form of the
symptom the more reason we shall have for expecting to be able
to establish this connection. The task is then simply to discover,
in respect to a senseless idea and a pointless action, the past
situation in which the idea was justified and the action served
a purpose. The obsessional action of our patient who ran to the
table and rang for the housemaid is a perfect model of this kind
of symptom. But there are—and they are very frequent—
symptoms of quite another character. They must be described
as ‘typical’ symptoms of an illness; they are approximately the
same in all cases, individual distinctions disappear in them or at
least shrink up to such an extent that it is difficult to bring them
into connection with the patients’ individual experience and to
relate them to particular situations they have experienced. Let
us look once more at obsessional neurosis. The sleep-ceremonial
of our second patient already has much that is typical about it,
though at the same time it has enough individual traits to make
what I might call a ‘historical’ interpretation possible. But all
these obsessional patients have a tendency to repeat, to make
their performances rhythmical and to keep them isolated from
other actions. The majority of them wash too much. Patients
who suffer from agoraphobia (topophobia or fear of spaces),
which we no longer regard as obsessional neurosis but describe
as ‘anxiety hysteria’, often repeat the same features in their
symptoms with wearisome monotony: they are afraid of en­
closed spaces, of large open squares, of lengthy roads and
streets. They feel protected if they are accompanied by an
acquaintance or followed by a vehicle, and so on. On this
similar background, however, different patients nevertheless
display their individual requirements—whims, one is inclined
to say—which in some cases contradict one another directly.
One patient avoids only narrow streets and another only wide

ii

XVII. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS

|

;

I

,

!
I
I
I

271

ones; one can go out only if there are few people in the street,
another only if there are many. In the same way, hysteria, in
spite of its wealth of individual traits, has a superfluity of com­
mon, typical symptoms, which seem to resist any easy historical
derivation. And we must not forget that it is these typical
symptoms, indeed, which give us our bearings when we make
our diagnosis. Suppose, in a case of hysteria, we have really
traced a typical symptom back to an experience or a chain of
similar experiences—a case of hysterical vomiting, for instance,
to a series of disgusting impressions—then we are at a loss when
the analysis in a similar case of vomiting reveals a series of a
quite different kind of ostensibly effective experiences. It looks,
then, as though for unknown reasons hysterical patients are
bound to produce vomiting and as though the historical pre­
cipitating causes revealed by analysis were only pretexts which,
if they happen to be there, are exploited by this internal
necessity.
So we are now faced by the depressing discovery that, though
we can give a satisfactory explanation of the individual neurotic
symptoms by their connection with experiences, our skill leaves
us in the lurch when we come to the far more frequent typical
symptoms. Furthermore, I am far from having made you
acquainted with all the difficulties that arise when consistently
pursuing the historical interpretation of symptoms. Nor do I
intend to do so; for, though it is my intention not to gloss
things over to you or conceal them, I cannot throw you into
perplexity and confusion at the very beginning of our common
studies. It is true that we have only made a beginning with our
efforts at understanding the significance of symptoms; but we
will hold fast to what we have achieved and pursue our way
step by step to a mastery of what we have not yet understood.
I will try to console you, therefore, with the reflection that any
fundamental distinction between one kind of symptom and the
other is scarcely to be assumed. If the individual symptoms are
so unmistakably dependent on the patient’s experience, it re­
mains possible that the typical symptoms may go back to an
experience which is in itself typical—common to all human
beings. Other features which recur regularly in neuroses may
be general reactions which are imposed on the patients by the
nature of their pathological change, like the repetitions or

i

. ’

1

'
■
;
।i
I[
l
'
(
J
‘

;
■

'
J
I i
I I

i
il
11
: f

!
I

272

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

doubts in obsessional neurosis. In short, we have no grounds for
premature despair; we shall see what remains to be seen.
A quite similar difficulty faces us in the theory of dreams. I
could not deal with it in our earlier discussions on dreams. The
manifest content of dreams is of the greatest diversity and in­
dividual variety, and we have shown in detail what one derives
from this content by means of analysis. But alongside of these
there are dreams which equally deserve to be called ‘typical’,
which happen in everyone in the same way, dreams with a
uniform content, which offer the same difficulties to interpretation. They are dreams of falling, flying, floating, swimming, of
being inhibited, of being naked and certain other anxietydreams—which lead, in different people, now to this and now
to that interpretation, without any light being thrown on their
monotony and typical occurrence. But in these dreams too we
observe that this common background is enlivened by additions
that vary individually; and it is probable that, with a widening of our knowledge, it will be possible, without constraint, to
include these dreams too in the understanding of dream-life
which we have acquired from other dreams.1
1 [See the section on ‘typical’ dreams in The Interpretation of Dreams
(1900a), Chapter V (D).]
'

LECTURE XVIII

1

।

>

>

I
'
|

FIXATION TO TRAUMAS—
THE UNCONSCIOUS
Ladies and Gentlemen,—In my last lecture I expressed a
desire that our work should go forward on the basis not of our
doubts but of our discoveries. We have not yet had any discussion of two of the most interesting implications that follow from
our two sample analyses.

To take the first of these. Both patients give us an impression
of having been ‘fixated’ to a particular portion of their past, as
though they could not manage to free themselves from it and
were for that reason alienated from the present and the future.
They then remained lodged in their illness in the sort of way in
which in earlier days people retreated into a monastery in
order to bear the burden there of their ill-fated lives. What had
brought this fate upon our first patient was the marriage which
she had in real life abandoned. By means of her symptoms she
continued to carry on her dealings with her husband. We learnt
to understand the voices that pleaded for him, that excused him,
that put him on a pedestal and that lamented his loss. Although
she was young and desirable to other men, she had taken every
precaution, real and imaginary (magical), to remain faithful to
him. She did not show herself to strangers and she neglected
her personal appearance; furthermore, once she had sat down
in a chair she was unable to get out of it quickly,1 she refused to
sign her name, and she could not make any presents, on the
ground that no one ought to receive anything from her.
The same effect was produced on the life of our second
patient, the young girl, by an erotic attachment to her father
which had started during the years before her puberty. The
conclusion she herself drew was that she could not marry as
long as she was so ill. We, however, may suspect that she had
become so ill in order not to have to marry and in order to
remain with her father.
1 [This symptom is further described and explained in Freud’s other
account of the case (19075), Standard Ed., 9, 120-1.]
273

274

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

We cannot dismiss the question of why, in what way and for
what motive a person can arrive at such a remarkable attitude
to life and one that is so inexpedient—assuming that this
attitude is a general characteristic of neuroses and not a special
peculiarity of these two patients. And in fact it is a general
feature, of great practical importance, in every neurosis.
Breuer’s first hysterical patient [p. 257 above] was similarly
fixated to the period when she was nursing her father in a
serious illness. In spite of her recovery, in a certain respect she
remained cut off from life; she remained healthy and efficient
but avoided the normal course of a woman’s life.1 In every one
of our patients, analysis shows us that they have been carried
back to some particular period of their past by the symptoms
of their illness or their consequences. In the majority of cases,
indeed, a very early phase of life is chosen for the purpose—a
period of their childhood or even, laughable as this may sound,
of their existence as an infant at the breast.
The closest analogy to this behaviour of our neurotics is
afforded by illnesses which are being produced with special
frequency precisely at the present time by the war—what are
described as traumatic neuroses. Similar cases, of course,
appeared before the war as well, after railway collisions and
other alarming accidents involving fatal risks. Traumatic neu­
roses are not in their essence the same thing as the spontaneous
neuroses which we are in the habit of investigating and treating
by analysis; nor have we yet succeeded in bringing them into
harmony with our views, and I hope I shall be able at some time
to explain to you the reason for this limitation.2 But in one
respect we may insist that there is a complete agreement be­
tween them. The traumatic neuroses give a clear indication
that a fixation to the moment of the traumatic accident lies at
their root. These patients regularly repeat the traumatic situa­
tion in their dreams;8 where hysteriform attacks occur that
admit of an analysis, we find that the attack corresponds to a
1 [Anna O. was never married. See Jones, 1953, 247-8.]
8 [Traumatic neuroses are mentioned again on p. 381 below. Freud
was later able to throw more light on the war neuroses (1919J).]
8 [This particular point played a part in Freud’s first discussion of the
‘compulsion to repeat’ a few years later. See Beyond the Pleasure Principle
(WZQg), Standard Ed., 18, 13 and 23.]

XVIII. FIXATION—THE UNCONSCIOUS

275

complete transplanting of the patient into the traumatic situation.1 It is as though these patients had not finished with the
traumatic situation, as though they were still faced by it as an
immediate task which has not been dealt with; and we take this
view quite seriously. It shows us the way to what we may call
an economic view of mental processes.12 *Indeed,
**
the term ‘traumatic’ has no other sense than an economic one. We apply it to
an experience which within a short period of time presents the
mind with an increase of stimulus too powerful to be dealt with
or worked off in the normal way, and this must result in permanent disturbances of the manner in which the energy
operates.
This analogy is bound to tempt us to describe as traumatic
those experiences too to which our neurotic patients seem to be
fixated. This would promise to offer us a simple determinant for
the onset of neurosis. Neurosis could then be equated with a
traumatic illness and would come about owing to inability to
deal with an experience whose affective colouring was exces­
sively powerful. And this indeed was actually the first formula
in which (in 1893 and 1895) Breuer and I accounted theoreti­
cally for our new observations.8 A case like that of the first of
the two patients in my last lecture—the young married woman
separated from her husband—fits in very well with this view.
She had not got over the failure of her marriage and remained
attached to that trauma. But our second case—that of the girl
with a fixation upon her father—shows us already that the
formula is not sufficiently comprehensive. On the one hand, a
little girl’s being in love like this with her father is something so
common and so frequently surmounted that the term ‘trau­
matic’ applied to it would lose all its meaning; and, on the other
hand, the patient’s history showed us that in the first instance
her erotic fixation appeared to have passed off without doing
any damage, and it was only several years later that it re­
appeared in the symptoms of the obsessional neurosis. Here,
1 [This was already recognized in Section IV of the Breuer and
Freud ‘Preliminary Communication’ (1893a), Standard Ed., 2, 14.)
2 [Freud returns to this later (p. 356.)]
8 [See, for instance, Section II of the Breuer and Freud ‘Preliminary
Communication’ (1893a), and in particular its last two paragraphs,
Standard Ed., 2, 11.]

j

j

i
I

'
1

i

276
GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES
then, we foresee complications, a greater wealth of determinants
for the onset of illness; but we may also suspect that there is no
need to abandon the traumatic line of approach as being
erroneous: it must be possible to fit it in and subsume it some­
where else.
Here once more, then, we must break off the course we have
started on. For the moment it leads no further and we shall
have to learn all kinds of other things before we can find its
proper continuation.1 But on the subject of fixation to a par­
ticular phase in the past we may add that such behaviour is far
more widespread than neurosis. Every neurosis includes a fixa­
tion of that kind, but not every fixation leads to a neurosis,
coincides with a neurosis or arises owing to a neurosis. A perfect
model of an affective fixation to something that is past is pro­
vided by mourning, which actually involves the most complete
alienation from the present and the future. But even the judge­
ment of a layman will distinguish sharply between mourning
and neurosis. There are, on the other hand, neuroses which may
be described as a pathological form of mourning.2
It may happen, too, that a person is brought so completely
to a stop by a traumatic event which shatters the foundations
of his life that he abandons all interest in the present and future
and remains permanently absorbed in mental concentration
upon the past. But an unfortunate such as this need not on that
account become a neurotic. We will not attach too much value
to this one feature, therefore, in characterizing neurosis, how­
ever regularly present and however important it may usually
be.
Let us turn now to the second of the discoveries which follow
from our analyses; in its case we need not fear having to make
a subsequent qualification of our views. I have described to you
how our first patient carried out a senseless obsessional action
and how she reported an intimate memory from her past life
as having some connection with it: and how afterwards I
1 [The subject is taken up again in Lecture XXII.]
1 [See on this Freud’s metapsychological paper ‘Mourning and
Melancholia’ (1917e), actually published after the delivery of this
lecture, though written two years earlier. A short reference to melan­
cholia appears in Lecture XXVI, p. 427 f. below.]

I

XVIII. FIXATION—THE UNCONSCIOUS

277

examined the connection between the two and discovered the
intention of the obsessional action from its relation to the
memory. But there is one factor which I have entirely neglected,
though it deserves our fullest attention. However often the
patient repeated her obsessional action, she knew nothing of its
being derived from the experience she had had. The connection between the two was hidden from her; she could only quite
truthfully reply that she did not know what it was that was
making her carry out her action. Then suddenly one day, under
the influence of the treatment, she succeeded in discovering the
connection and reported it to me. But she still knew nothing of
the intention with which she was performing the obsessional
action—the intention of correcting a distressing portion of the
past and of putting her beloved husband in a better light. It
took a fairly long time and called for much labour before she
understood and admitted to me that such a motive alone could
have been the driving force of her obsessional action.
The link with the scene after her unhappy wedding-night and
the patient’s affectionate motive constituted, taken together,
what we have called the ‘sense’ of the obsessional action. But
while she was carrying out the obsessional action this sense had
been unknown to her in both directions—both its ‘whence’ and
its ‘whither’. [Cf. p. 284 below.] Mental processes had therefore
been at work in her and the obsessional action was the effect of
them; she had been aware of this effect in a normal mental
fashion, but none of the mental predeterminants of this effect
came to the knowledge of her consciousness. She behaved in
precisely the same way as a hypnotized subject whom Bernheim
had ordered to open an umbrella in the hospital ward five
minutes after he woke up. The man carried out this instruction
when he was awake, but he could produce no motive for his
action.1 It is a state of affairs of this sort that we have before our
eyes when we speak of the existence of unconscious mental processes. We can challenge anyone in the world to give a more
correct scientific account of this state of affairs, and if he does
we will gladly renounce our hypothesis of unconscious mental
processes. Till that happens, however, we will hold fast to the
1 [Freud gave a much fuller account of this episode, at which he
himself was present, in his last, unfinished, paper ‘Some Elementary
Lessons in Psycho-Analysis’ (19406 [1938]). See also above, p. 103.]

[
I
।
।

।

]
।

!

278

:

,
।
I
।
'
i
>
■
'

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

hypothesis; and if someone objects that here the unconscious
is nothing real in a scientific sense, is a makeshift, une fagon de
parler, we can only shrug our shoulders resignedly and dismiss
what he says as unintelligible. Something not real, which
produces effects of such tangible reality as an obsessional
action!1
And we meet with what is in essence the same thing in our
second patient. She had made a rule that the pillow must not
touch the back of the bedstead, and she had to obey this rule
though she did not know where it came from, what it meant or
to what motives it owed its power. Whether she herself regarded
the rule as a matter of indifference, or whether she struggled
against it or raged against it or decided to transgress it—none
of this made any difference to her carrying it out. It had to be
obeyed, and she asked herself vainly why. We must recognize,
however, that these symptoms of obsessional neurosis, these
ideas and impulses which emerge one knows not whence, which
prove so resistant to every influence from an otherwise normal
mind, which give the patient himself the impression of being
all-powerful guests from an alien world, immortal beings in­
truding into the turmoil of mortal life—these symptoms offer
the plainest indication of there being a special region of the
mind, shut off from the rest. They lead, by a path that cannot
be missed, to a conviction of the existence of the unconscious in
the mind; and that is precisely why clinical psychiatry, which is
acquainted only with a psychology of consciousness, can deal
with these symptoms in no other way than by declaring them
to be signs of a special sort of degeneracy. Obsessional ideas and
obsessional impulses are not, of course, themselves unconscious,
any more than the performance of obsessional actions escapes
conscious perception. They would not have become symptoms
if they had not forced their way into consciousness. But their
psychical predeterminants which we infer by means of analysis,
the connections into which we insert them by interpretation,
are unconscious, at least until we have made them conscious to
the patient by the work of analysis.
If, now, you consider further that the state of affairs which we
have established in our two cases is confirmed for every
symptom of every neurotic illness—that always and every1 [Cf. above, p. 257.]

XVIII. FIXATION—THE UNCONSCIOUS.

279

where the sense of the symptoms is unknown to the patient and
that analysis regularly shows that these symptoms are deriva­
tives of unconscious processes but can, subject to a variety of
favourable circumstances, be made conscious—if you consider
this, you will understand that in psycho-analysis we cannot do
without what is at the same time unconscious and mental, and
are accustomed to operate with it as though it were something
palpable to the senses. But you will understand as well, perhaps,
how incapable of forming a judgement on this question are all
those other people, who are only acquainted with the uncon­
scious as a concept, who have never carried out an analysis and
have never interpreted dreams or found a sense and intention
in neurotic symptoms. To say it for our ends once again: the
possibility of giving a sense to neurotic symptoms by analytic
interpretation is an unshakeable proof of the existence—or, if
you prefer it, of the necessity for the hypothesis—of uncon­
scious mental processes.
But that is not all. Thanks to a second discovery of Breuer’s,
which seems to me even more significant than the other [p. 257]
and which he shared with no one, we learn still more of the
connection between neurotic symptoms and the unconscious.
Not only is the sense of the symptoms regularly unconscious,
but there is an inseparable relation between this fact of the
symptoms being unconscious and the possibility of their exist­
ing. You will understand me in a moment. I follow Breuer in
asserting that every time we come upon a symptom we can
infer that there are certain definite unconscious processes in the
patient which contain the sense of the symptom. But it is also
necessary for that sense to be unconscious in order that the
symptom can come about. Symptoms are never constructed
from conscious processes; as soon as the unconscious processes
concerned have become conscious, the symptom must disap­
pear. Here you will at once perceive a means of approach to
therapy, a way of making symptoms disappear. And in this
way Breuer did in fact restore his hysterical patient—that is,
freed her from her symptoms; he found a technique for bringing
to her consciousness the unconscious processes which contained
the sense of the symptoms, and the symptoms disappeared.
This discovery of Breuer’s was not the result of speculation
but of a fortunate observation made possible by the patient’s

'

'

।
i

j

,
i
(

.
;

j

280

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

co-operation.1 Nor should you torment yourselves with attempts
at understanding it by tracing it back to something already
known; you should recognize in it a new fundamental fact, by
whose help much else will become explicable. Allow me, there­
fore, to repeat the same thing to you in another way.
The construction of a symptom is a substitute for something
else that did not happen. Some particular mental processes
should normally have developed to a point at which conscious­
ness received information of them. This, however, did not take
place, and instead—out of the interrupted processes, which had
been somehow disturbed and were obliged to remain uncon­
scious—the symptom emerged. Thus something in the nature
of an exchange has taken place; if this can be reversed the
therapy of the neurotic symptoms will have achieved its task.
This discovery of Breuer’s is still the foundation of psycho­
analytic therapy. The thesis that symptoms disappear when we
have made their unconscious predeterminants conscious has
been confirmed by all subsequent research, although we meet
with the strangest and most unexpected complications when we
attempt to carry it through in practice. Our therapy works by
transforming what is unconscious into what is conscious, and
it works only in so far as it is in a position to effect that trans­
formation.
And now I must quickly make a short digression, to avoid
the risk of your imagining that this therapeutic work is accom­
plished too easily. From what I have so far said a neurosis
would seem to be the result of a kind of ignorance—a not knowing about mental events that one ought to know of. This would
be a close approximation to some well-known Socratic doc­
trines, according to which even vices are based on ignorance.
Now it would as a rule be very easy for a doctor experienced in
analysis to guess what mental impulses had remained uncon­
scious in a particular patient. So it ought not to be very difficult,
either, for him to restore the patient by communicating his
knowledge to him and so remedying his ignorance. One part
at least of the symptom’s unconscious sense could be easily
dealt with in this way, though it is true that the doctor cannot
guess much about the other part—the connection between the
1 [Breuer’s description of the occurrence will be found in his case
history of Anna O. in Studies on Hysteria (1895J), Standard Ed., 2, 34-5.]

I

XVIII. FIXATION—THE UNCONSCIOUS

281

symptoms and the patient’s experiences—, since he himself
does not know those experiences but must wait till the patient
remembers them and tells them to him. But even for this a sub­
stitute can in some instances be found. One can make enquiries
about these experiences from the patient’s relatives and they
will often be able to recognize which of them had a traumatic
effect, and they can even sometimes report experiences of
which the patient himself knows nothing because they occurred
at a very early period of his life. Thus, by combining these two
methods, we should have a prospect of relieving the patient of
his pathogenic ignorance with little expense of time or trouble.
If only that was how things happened! We came upon dis­
coveries in this connection for which we were at first unpre­
pared. Knowledge is not always the same as knowledge: there
are different sorts of knowledge, which are far from equivalent
psychologically. T1 y a fagots et fagots’, as Moliere has said.1
The doctor’s knowledge is not the same as the patient’s and
cannot produce the same effects. If the doctor transfers his
knowledge to the patient as a piece of information, it has no
result. No, it would be wrong to say that. It does not have the
result of removing the symptoms, but it has another one—of
setting the analysis in motion, of which the first signs are often
expressions of denial. The patient knows after this what he did
not know before—the sense of his symptom; yet he knows it
just as little as he did. Thus we learn that there is more than one
kind of ignorance. We shall need to have a somewhat deeper
understanding of psychology to show us in what these differ­
ences consist.2 But our thesis that the symptoms vanish when
their sense is known remains true in spite of this. All we have to
add is that the knowledge must rest on an internal change in the
patient such as can only be brought about by a piece of psy­
chical work with a particular aim. We are faced here by prob­
lems which will presently be brought together into the
dynamics of the construction of symptoms.
I must ask now, Gentlemen, whether what I am saying to
you is not too obscure and complicated. Am I not confusing
you by so often taking back what I have said or qualifying it—
by starting up trains of thought and then dropping them? I
1 [Le m&tecin malgrt lui, I, 6.]
* [Freud returns to this question in Lecture XXVII, p. 436 below.]

I

I

i

282

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

should be sorry if that were so. But I have a strong dislike of
simplifying things at the expense of truthfulness. I have no
objection to your receiving the full impact of the many­
sidedness and complexity of our subject; and I think, too, that
it does no harm if I tell you more on every point than you can
at the moment make use of. I am aware, after all, that every
listener or reader puts what is presented to him into shape in
his mind, shortens it and simplifies it, and selects from it what
he would like to retain. Up to a certain point it is no doubt
true that the more there is at one’s disposal the more one is left
with. Permit me to hope that, in spite of all the trimmings, you
have clearly grasped the essential part of what I have told
you—about the sense of symptoms, about the unconscious and
about the relation between them. No doubt you have also
understood that our further efforts will lead in two directions:
first towards discovering how people fall ill and how they can
come to adopt the neurotic attitude to life—which is a clinical
problem; and secondly towards learning how the pathological
symptoms develop from the determinants of the neurosis—
which remains a problem of mental dynamics. There must
moreover be a point somewhere at which the two problems
converge.

I will not go into this any further to-day. But since we still
have some time to spare, I should like to direct your attention
to another characteristic of our two analyses, which, once again,
it will only be possible to appreciate fully later on—to the gaps
in the patients’ memories, their amnesias. As you have heard
[p. 201], the task of a psycho-analytic treatment can be ex­
pressed in this formula: its task is to make conscious everything
that is pathogenically unconscious. You will perhaps be sur­
prised to learn, then, that this formula can be replaced by
another one: its task is to fill up all the gaps in the patient’s
memory, to remove his amnesias. This would amount to the
same thing. We are thus implying that the amnesias of neurotic
patients have an important connection with the origin of their
symptoms. If, however, you consider the case of our first
analysis you will not find this view of amnesia justified. The
patient had not forgotten the scene from which her obsessive
action was derived; on the contrary, she had a vivid recol­

XVIII. FIXATION—THE UNCONSCIOUS

■
J

,
।
|
l
J
1
•

j
।

lection of it; nor did anything else forgotten play a part in the
origin of the symptom. The position with our second patient
(the girl with the obsessional ceremonial), though less clear, was
on the whole analogous. She had not really forgotten her be­
haviour in earlier years—the fact that she had insisted on the
door between her parents’ bedroom and her own being left
open and that she had driven her mother out of her place in
her parents’ bed; she remembered this very plainly, even though
with hesitation and unwillingly. The only thing we can consider
striking is that the first patient, in carrying out her obsessional
action on countless occasions, had never once noticed its resem­
blance to her experience on her wedding-night, and that the
memory of it did not occur to her when she was directly asked
to look for the motives of her obsessional action. And the same
thing applies to the girl, whose ceremonial and its causes were
moreover connected with a situation which was identically
repeated every evening.1 In both these cases there was no true
amnesia, no missing memory; but a connection had been
broken which ought to have led to the reproduction or re­
emergence of the memory.
A disturbance of memory of this kind is enough for obses­
sional neurosis; but the case is different with hysteria. As a rule
the latter neurosis is marked by amnesias on a really large
scale. In analysing each separate hysterical symptom one is
usually led to a whole chain of impressions of events, which,
when they recur, are expressly described by the patient as
having been till then forgotten. On the one hand, this chain
reaches back to the earliest years of life, so that the hysterical
amnesia can be recognized as an immediate continuation of
the infantile amnesia which, for us normal people, conceals the
beginnings of our mental life. [Cf. p. 199 f. above.] On the other
hand, we learn with astonishment that even the patient’s most
recent experiences can be subject to forgetting, and that the
occasions which precipitated the outbreak of the illness or led
to its intensification are in particular encroached upon, if not
completely swallowed up, by amnesia. It regularly happens
that important details have disappeared from the total picture
of a recent recollection of this sort or that they have been
replaced by falsifications of memory. Indeed it happens with
1 [I.e. her father and mother sleeping together.]

j

283

s.f. xvi—T

!
i

284

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

almost equal regularity that certain memories of recent ex­
periences only emerge shortly before the end of an analysis—
memories which had been held back till that late moment and
had left perceptible gaps in the continuity of the case.
Such restrictions upon the faculty of memory are, as I have
said, characteristic of hysteria, in which, indeed, states also
arise as symptoms—hysterical attacks—which need leave no
trace behind them in the memory . If things are different in
obsessional neurosis, you may conclude that what we are dealing with in these amnesias is a psychological characteristic of
the change that occurs in hysteria and is not a universal
feature of neuroses in general. The importance of this dis­
tinction is reduced by the following consideration. We have
comprised two things as the ‘sense’ of a symptom: its ‘whence’
and its ‘whither’ or ‘what for’ [p. 277]—that is, the impres­
sions and experiences from which it arose and the intentions
which it serves. Thus the ‘whence’ of a symptom resolves itself
into impressions which came from outside, which were necessarily once conscious and may have since become unconscious
through forgetting. The ‘whither’ of a symptom, its purpose, is
invariably, however, an endopsychic process, which may possibly have been conscious at first but may equally well never
have been conscious and may have remained in the unconscious from the very start. Thus it is not of great importance
whether the amnesia has laid hold on the ‘whence’ as well—the
experiences on which the symptom is supported—as happens
in hysteria; it is on the ‘whither’, the purpose of the symptom,
which may have been unconscious from the beginning, that its
dependence on the unconscious is founded—and no less firmly
in obsessional neurosis than in hysteria.

r■
:[
'
•[
I
|
! ।
' I
’>'
i ।
1

'
;
1

1
,
_,
'
I
(
[
.
‘

I
>

.
‘
•
•

But in thus emphasizing the unconscious in mental life we
have conjured up the most evil spirits of criticism against
psycho-analysis. Do not be surprised at this, and do not suppose
that the resistance to us rests only on the understandable
difficulty of the unconscious or the relative inaccessibility of the
experiences which provide evidence of it. Its source, I think, lies
deeper. In the course of centuries the naive self-love of men has
had to submit to two major blows at the hands of science. The
first was when they learnt that our earth was not the centre of

XVIII. FIXATION—THE UNCONSCIOUS

i
।

:

I
|
’

।

285

the universe but only a tiny fragment of a cosmic system of
scarcely imaginable vastness. This is associated in our minds
with the name of Copernicus, though something similar had
already been asserted by Alexandrian science. The second blow
fell when biological research destroyed man’s supposedly privi­
leged place in creation and proved his descent from the
animal kingdom and his ineradicable animal nature. This
revaluation has been accomplished in our own days by Darwin,
Wallace and their predecessors, though not without the most
violent contemporary opposition. But human megalomania
will have suffered its third and most wounding blow from the
psychological research of the present time which seeks to prove
to the ego that it is not even master in its own house, but must
content itself with scanty information of what is going on un­
consciously in its mind. We psycho-analysts were not the first
and not the only ones to utter this call to introspection; but it
seems to be our fate to give it its most forcible expression and to
support it with empirical material which affects every in­
dividual. Hence arises the general revolt against our science,
the disregard of all considerations of academic civility and the
releasing of the opposition from every restraint of impartial
logic.1 And beyond all this we have yet to disturb the peace of
this world in still another way, as you will shortly hear.
1 [Freud had developed this theme at greater length in a paper on
‘A Difficulty in the Path of Psycho-Analysis’ (1917a), Standard Ed., 17,
139 ff.]

!

।

LECTURE XIX

RESISTANCE AND REPRESSION1
Ladies and Gentlemen,—Before we can make any further pro­
gress in our understanding of the neuroses, we stand in need
of some fresh observations. Here we have two such, both of
which are very remarkable and at the time when they were
made were very surprising. Our discussions of last year will, it
is true, have prepared you for both of them.12

In the first place, then, when we undertake to restore a
patient to health, to relieve him of the symptoms of his illness,
he meets us with a violent and tenacious resistance, which per­
sists throughout the whole length of the treatment. This is such
a strange fact that we cannot expect it to find much credence.
It is best to say nothing about it to the patient’s relatives, for
they invariably regard it as an excuse on our part for the length
or failure of our treatment. The patient, too, produces all the
phenomena of this resistance without recognizing it as such, and
if we can induce him to take our view of it and to reckon with
its existence, that already counts as a great success. Only think
of it! The patient, who is suffering so much from his symptoms
and is causing those about him to share his sufferings, who is
ready to undertake so many sacrifices in time, money, effort
and self-discipline in order to be freed from those symptoms—
we are to believe that this same patient puts up a struggle in the
interest of his illness against the person who is helping him. How
1 [The essence of Freud’s views on repression is already given in his
contribution to Studies on Hysteria (1895<i), Standard Ed., 2, 268-70. He
gave a similar description of his discovery in his history of the psycho­
analytic movement (1914rf), ibid., 14, 16. An account of the develop­
ment of Freud’s theory of repression will be found in the Editor’s Note
to his metapsychological paper on the subject (1915J), Standard Ed.,
14, 143 ff.—a paper which, together with Section IV of the paper on
‘The Unconscious’ (1915e), ibid., 180 ff., contains Freud’s deepest
reflections on the question.]
2 [The concept of resistance had been introduced in Lecture VII,
p. 116 above. The second observation is described on p. 298 below.]
286

XIX. RESISTANCE AND REPRESSION

287

improbable such an assertion must sound! Yet it is true; and
when its improbability is pointed out to us, we need only reply
that it is not without analogies. A man who has gone to the
dentist because of an unbearable toothache will nevertheless try
to hold the dentist back when he approaches the sick tooth with
a pair of forceps.
The patient’s resistance is of very many sorts, extremely
subtle and often hard to detect; and it exhibits protean changes
in the forms in which it manifests itself. The doctor must be
distrustful and remain on his guard against it.
In psycho-analytic therapy we make use of the same tech­
nique that is familiar to you from dream-interpretation. We
instruct the patient to put himself into a state of quiet, unre­
flecting self-observation, and to report to us whatever internal
perceptions he is able to make—feelings, thoughts, memories—
in the order in which they occur to him. At the same time we
warn him expressly against giving way to any motive which
would lead him to make a selection among these associations
or to exclude any of them, whether on the ground that it is too
disagreeable or too indiscreet to say, or that it is too unimportant or
irrelevant, or that it is nonsensical and need not be said. We urge
him always to follow only the surface of his consciousness and
to leave aside any criticism of what he finds, whatever shape
that criticism may take; and we assure him that the success of
the treatment, and above all its duration, depends on the con­
scientiousness with which he obeys this fundamental technical
rule of analysis.1 We already know from the technique of
1 [Freud had already stated the rule in connection with the interpret­
ing of dreams in Lecture VII, p. 115 above. He first laid it down in
Chapter II of The Interpretation ofDreams (1900a), Standard Ed., 4, 100-2,
and again in his contribution to a book of Lbwenfeld’s (Freud, 1904a
[1903], Standard Ed., 7, 251). The actual term ‘fundamental rule’ was
first used in the technical paper on ‘The Dynamics of Transference’
(19126), Standard Ed., 12, 107, where an Editor’s footnote gives some
other early references. Perhaps the fullest account is in another technical
paper, ‘On Beginning the Treatment’ (1913c), ibid., 134-6. Among later
mentions may be noted a passage near the beginning of Chapter IV of
the Autobiographical Study (1925d), ibid., 20, 40-1, and an interesting
allusion to the deeper reasons for the obstacles to obeying the rule,
towards the end of Chapter VI of Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety
(1926d), ibid., 121. In the latter passage, in the course of a discussion
of the part played by the defensive process of ‘isolation’ in ordinary

288

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

dream-interpretation that the associations giving rise to the
doubts and objections I have just enumerated are precisely the
ones that invariably contain the material which leads to the
uncovering of the unconscious. [Cf. Lecture VII, p. 116.]
The first thing we achieve by setting up this fundamental
technical rule is that it becomes the target for the attacks of the
resistance. The patient endeavours in every sort of way to ex­
tricate himself from its provisions. At one moment he declares
that nothing occurs to him, at the next that so many things are
crowding in on him that he cannot get hold of anything.
Presently we observe with pained astonishment that he has
given way first to one and then to another critical objection: he
betrays this to us by the long pauses that he introduces into his
remarks. He then admits that there is something he really can­
not say—he would be ashamed to; and he allows this reason to
prevail against his promise. Or he says that something has
occurred to him, but it concerns another person and not himself
and is therefore exempt from being reported. Or, what has now
occurred to him is really too unimportant, too silly and sense­
less: I cannot possibly have meant him to enter into thoughts
like that. So it goes on in innumerable variations, and one can
only reply that ‘to say everything’ really does mean ‘to say
everything’.
One hardly comes across a single patient who does not make
an attempt at reserving some region or other for himself so as
to prevent the treatment from having access to it. A man, whom
I can only describe as of the highest intelligence, kept silence in
this way for weeks on end about an intimate love-affair, and,
when he was called to account for having broken the sacred
rule, defended himself with the argument that he thought this
particular story was his private business. Analytic treatment
does not, of course, recognize any such right of asylum. Suppose
that in a town like Vienna the experiment was made of treating
a square such as the Hohe Markt, or a church like St. Stephen’s,
as places where no arrests might be made, and suppose we then
wanted to catch a particular criminal. We could be quite sure
of finding him in the sanctuary. I once decided to allow a man,
on whose efficiency much depended in the external world, the
directed thinking, Freud mentions especially the difficulties felt by
obsessional neurotics in this connection. See below, p. 289.]

XIX. RESISTANCE AND REPRESSION

289

right to make an exception of this kind because he was bound
under his oath of office not to make communications about cer­
tain things to another person. He, it is true, was satisfied with
the outcome; but I was not. I determined not to repeat an
attempt under such conditions.
Obsessional neurotics understand perfectly how to make the
technical rule almost useless by applying their over-conscien­
tiousness and doubts to it.1 Patients suffering from anxiety
hysteria occasionally succeed in carrying the rule ad absurdum by
producing only associations which are so remote from what we
are in search of that they contribute nothing to the analysis. But
it is not my intention to induct you into the handling of these
technical difficulties. It is enough to say that in the end, through
resolution and perseverance, we succeed in extorting a certain
amount of obedience to the fundamental technical rule from
the resistance—which thereupon jumps over to another sphere.
It now appears as an intellectual resistance, it fights by means
of arguments and exploits all the difficulties and improbabilities
which normal but uninstructed thinking finds in the theories of
analysis. It is now our fate to hear from this single voice all the
criticisms and objections which assail our ears in a chorus in
the scientific literature of the subject. And for this reason none
of the shouts that reach us from outside sound unfamiliar. It is
a regular storm in a tea-cup. But the patient is willing to be
argued with; he is anxious to get us to instruct him, teach
him, contradict him, introduce him to the literature, so that
he can find further instruction. He is quite ready to become
an adherent of psycho-analysis—on condition that analysis
spares him personally. But we recognize this curiosity as a re­
sistance, as a diversion from our particular tasks, and we repel
it. In the case of an obsessional neurotic we have to expect
special tactics of resistance. He will often allow the analysis to
proceed on its way uninhibited, so that it is able to shed an
ever-increasing light upon the riddle of his illness. We begin to
wonder in the end, however, why this enlightenment is accom­
panied by no practical advance, no diminution of the symp­
toms. We are then able to realize that resistance has withdrawn
on to the doubt belonging to the obsessional neurosis and from
that position is successfully defying us. It is as though the
1- [Cf. the end of the last footnote.]

290

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

patient were saying: ‘Yes, that’s all very nice and interesting,
and I’ll be very glad to go on with it further. It would change
my illness a lot if it were true. But I don’t in the least believe
that it is true; and, so long as I don’t believe it, it makes no
difference to my illness.’ Things can proceed like this for a long
time, till finally one comes up against this uncommitted attitude
itself, and the decisive struggle then breaks out.1
Intellectual resistances are not the worst: one always remains
superior to them. But the patient also knows how to put up
resistances, without going outside the framework of the analysis,
the overcoming of which is among the most difficult of technical
problems. Instead of remembering, he repeats attitudes and
emotional impulses from his early life which can be used as a
resistance against the doctor and the treatment by means of
what is known as ‘transference’.1
2 If the patient is a man, he
usually extracts this material from his relation to his father, into
whose place he fits the doctor, and in that way he makes re­
sistances out of his efforts to become independent in himself and
in his judgements, out of his ambition, the first aim of which was
to do things as well as his father or to get the better of him,
or out of his unwillingness to burden himself for the second time
in his life with a load of gratitude. Thus at times one has an
impression that the patient has entirely replaced his better in­
tention of making an end to his illness by the alternative one
of putting the doctor in the wrong, of making him realize his
impotence and of triumphing over him. Women have a mas­
terly gift for exploiting an affectionate, erotically tinged trans­
ference to the doctor for the purposes of resistance. If this
attachment reaches a certain height, all their interest in the
immediate situation in the treatment and all the obligations
they undertook at its commencement vanish; their jealousy,
which is never absent, and their exasperation at their inevitable
rejection, however considerately expressed, are bound to have
a damaging effect on their personal understanding with the
1 [The part played by doubt in cases of obsessional neurosis is referred
to above in Lecture XVII, p. 259. The necessity for special technical
methods in dealing with such cases was mentioned by Freud a little
later in his Budapest Congress paper (1919a), Standard. Ed., 17, 166.]
2 [Lecture XXVII, p. 431 below, is devoted to a full discussion of this
phenomenon.]

XIX. RESISTANCE AND REPRESSION

291

doctor and so to put out of operation one of the most powerful
motive forces of the analysis.
Resistances of this kind should not be one-sidedly con­
demned. They include so much of the most important material
from the patient’s past and bring it back in so convincing a
fashion that they become some of the best supports of the
analysis if a skilful technique knows how to give them the right
turn. Nevertheless, it remains a remarkable fact that this
material is always in the service of the resistance to begin with
and brings to the fore a facade that is hostile to the treatment.
It may also be said that what is being mobilized for fighting
against the alterations we are striving for are character-traits,
attitudes of the ego. In this connection we discover that these
character-traits were formed in relation to the determinants of
the neurosis and in reaction against its demands, and we come
upon traits which cannot normally emerge, or not to the same
extent, and which may be described as latent. Nor must you get
an impression that we regard the appearance of these resist­
ances as an unforeseen risk to analytic influence. No, we are
aware that these resistances are bound to come to light; in fact
we are dissatisfied if we cannot provoke them clearly enough
and are unable to demonstrate them to the patient. Indeed we
come finally to understand that the overcoming of these resist­
ances is the essential function of analysis1 and is the only part
of our work which gives us an assurance that we have achieved
something with the patient.
If you further consider that the patient makes all the chance
events that occur during his analysis into interferences with it,
that he uses as reasons for slackening his efforts every diversion
outside the analysis, every comment by a person of authority
in his environment who is hostile to analysis, any chance
organic illness or any that complicates his neurosis and, even,
indeed, every improvement in his condition—if you consider
all this, you will have obtained an approximate, though still in­
complete, picture of the forms and methods of the resistance,
the struggle against which accompanies every analysis.1
2
1 [That this was a relatively late development in analytic technique
is shown, for instance, by a paragraph in Freud’s Nuremberg Congress
paper (1910cf), Standard Ed., 11, 144.]
2 [The present description of the forms taken by resistance in general

292

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

I have treated this point in such great detail because I must
now inform you that this experience of ours with the resistance
of neurotics to the removal of their symptoms became the basis
of our dynamic view of the neuroses. Originally Breuer and
I myself carried out psychotherapy by means of hypnosis;
Breuer’s first patient1 was treated throughout under hypnotic
influence, and to begin with I followed him in this. I admit that
at that period the work proceeded more easily and pleasantly,
and also in a much shorter time. But results were capricious and
not lasting; and for that reason I finally dropped hypnosis.2
And I then understood that an insight into the dynamics of
these illnesses had not been possible so long as hypnosis was
employed.3 That state was precisely able to withhold the exist­
ence of the resistance from the doctor’s perception. It pushed
the resistance back, making a certain area free for analytic work,
and dammed it up at the frontiers of that area in such a way as
to be impenetrable, just as doubt does in obsessional neurosis.
For that reason I have been able to say that psycho-analysis
proper began when I dispensed with the help of hypnosis.4
If, however, the recognition of resistance has become so im­
portant, we should do well to find room for a cautious doubt
whether we have not been too light-heartedly assuming resist­
ances. Perhaps there really are cases of neurosis in which
associations fail for other reasons, perhaps the arguments
against our hypotheses really deserve to have their content
examined, and perhaps we are doing patients an injustice in so
conveniently setting aside their intellectual criticisms as resist­
ance. But, Gentlemen, we did not arrive at this judgement
is as full as any by Freud. But the special case of transference-resistance
is discussed in greater detail in his paper on ‘The Dynamics of Trans­
ference’ (19126).]
1 [See Lecture XVIII, p. 279 f. above.]
2 [Fairly exact dates for Freud’s use of hypnotism (1887-1896) will
be found in an Editor’s footnote to the case of Lucy R. in Studies on
Hysteria (1895d), Standard Ed., 2, 110-11.]
8 [Freud tells us that he first realized the great importance of resist­
ance during his analysis of Elisabeth von R. He was at that time using
the ‘pressure’ technique, without hypnosis. See Studies on Hysteria
(1895J), Standard Ed., 2, 154.]
4 [Cf. Freud’s statement in very similar words in his history of the
psycho-analytic movement (1914d), Standard Ed., 14, 16. Earlier he had
not been inclined to draw such a clear-cut line (cf. ibid., 7-8).]

XIX. RESISTANCE AND REPRESSION

293

lightly. We have had occasion to observe all these critical
patients at the moment of the emergence of a resistance and
after its disappearance. For resistance is constantly altering its
intensity during the course of a treatment; it always increases
when we are approaching a new topic, it is at its most intense
while we are at the climax of dealing with that topic, and it
dies away when the topic has been disposed of. Nor do we ever,
unless we have been guilty of special clumsiness in our tech­
nique, have to meet the full amount of resistance of which a
patient is capable. We have therefore been able to convince
ourselves that on countless occasions in the course of his analysis
the same man will abandon his critical attitude and then take
it up again. If we are on the point of bringing a specially dis­
tressing piece of unconscious material to his consciousness, he is
extremely critical; he may previously have understood and
accepted a great deal, but now it is just as though those
acquisitions have been swept away; in his efforts for opposition
at any price, he may offer a complete picture of someone who
is an emotional imbecile. But if we succeed in helping him to
overcome this new resistance, he recovers his insight and under­
standing. Thus his critical faculty is not an independent func­
tion, to be respected as such, it is the tool of his emotional
attitudes and is directed by his resistance. If there is something
he does not like, he can put up a shrewd fight against it and
appear highly critical; but if something suits his book, he can,
on the contrary, show himself most credulous. Perhaps none of
us are very different; a man who is being analysed only reveals
this dependence of the intellect upon emotional life so clearly
because in analysis we are putting such great pressure on him.
How, then, do we account for our observation that the
patient fights with such energy against the removal of his
symptoms and the setting of his mental processes on a normal
course? We tell ourselves that we have succeeded in discovering
powerful forces here which oppose any alteration of the patient’s
condition; they must be the same ones which in the past
brought this condition about. During the construction of his
symptoms something must have taken place which we can now
reconstruct from our experiences during the resolution of his
symptoms. We already know from Breuer’s observation that
there is a precondition for the existence of a symptom: some

294

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

mental process must not have been brought to an end normally
—so that it could become conscious. The symptom is a sub­
stitute for what did not happen at that point [p. 280 above].
We now know the point at which we must locate the operation
of the force which we have surmised. A violent opposition must
have started against the entry into consciousness of the ques­
tionable mental process, and for that reason it remained un­
conscious. As being something unconscious, it had the power to
construct a symptom. This same opposition, during psycho­
analytic treatment, sets itself up once more against our effort to
transform what is unconscious into what is conscious. This is
what we perceive as resistance. We have proposed to give the
pathogenic process which is demonstrated by the resistance the
name of repression.

We must now form more definite ideas about this process of
repression. It is the precondition for the construction of symp­
toms; but it is also something to which we know nothing
similar. Let us take as our model an impulse, a mental process
that endeavours to turn itself into an action. We know that it
can be repelled by what we term a rejection or condemnation.
When this happens, the energy at its disposal is withdrawn
from it; it becomes powerless, though it can persist as a memory.
The whole process of coming to a decision about it runs its
course within the knowledge of the ego. It is a very different
matter if we suppose that the same impulse is subjected to re­
pression. In that case it would retain its energy and no memory
of it would remain behind; moreover the process of repression
would be accomplished unnoticed by the ego. This compari­
son, therefore, brings us no nearer to the essential nature of
repression.
I will put before you the only theoretical ideas which have
proved of service for giving a more definite shape to the con­
cept of repression. It is above all essential for this purpose that
we should proceed from the purely descriptive meaning of the
word ‘unconscious’ to the systematic meaning of the same
word.1 That is, we will decide to say that the fact of a psychical
1 [See footnote 1, p. 227 above. The spatial analogy to resistance and
repression, which follows here, is similar to the one in the second of his
Five Lectures (1910a), Standard Ed., n, 25-7.]

I

XIX. RESISTANCE AND REPRESSION

295

process being conscious or unconscious is only one of its attributes and not necessarily an unambiguous one. If a process of
this kind has remained unconscious, its being kept" away from
consciousness may perhaps only be an indication of some vicissitude it has gone through, and not that vicissitude itself. In order
to form a picture of this vicissitude, let us assume that every
mental process—we must admit one exception, which we shall
mention at a later stage3—exists to begin with in an uncon­
scious stage or phase and that it is only from there that the pro­
cess passes over into the conscious phase, just as a photographic
picture begins as a negative and only becomes a picture after
being turned into a positive. Not every negative, however,
necessarily becomes a positive; nor is it necessary that every un­
conscious mental process should turn into a conscious one. This
may be advantageously expressed by saying that an individual
process belongs to begin with to the system of the unconscious
and can then, in certain circumstances, pass over into the
system of the conscious.
The crudest idea of these systems is the most convenient for
us—a spatial one. Let us therefore compare the system of the
unconscious to a large entrance hall, in which the mental impulses jostle one another like separate individuals. Adjoining
this entrance hall there is a second, narrower, room—a kind of
drawing-room—in which consciousness, too, resides. But on the
threshold between these two rooms a watchman performs his
function: he examines the different mental impulses, acts as a
censor, and will not admit them into the drawing-room if they
displease him. You will see at once that it does not make much
difference if the watchman turns away a particular impulse at
the threshold itself or if he pushes it back across the threshold
after it has entered the drawing-room. This is merely a question
of the degree of his watchfulness and of how early he carries out
his act of recognition. If we keep to this picture, we shall be
able to extend our nomenclature further. The impulses in the
entrance hall of the unconscious are out of sight of the conscious,
which is in the other room; to begin with they must remain
unconscious. If they have already pushed their way forward
to the threshold and have been turned back by the watchman,
1 [The exception, which seems to have escaped mention, must no
doubt be the case of external perception.]

I
।
i
'
i
|
|

■
■

|
'
1
;
'
i
.

296

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

then they are inadmissible to consciousness;1 we speak of
them as repressed. But even the impulses which the watchman
has allowed to cross the threshold are not on that account
necessarily conscious as well; they can only become so if they
succeed in catching the eye of consciousness. We are therefore
justified in calling this second room the system of the preconscious. In that case becoming conscious retains its purely de­
scriptive sense. For any particular impulse, however, the vicissi­
tude of repression consists in its not being allowed by the
watchman to pass from the system of the unconscious into that
of the preconscious. It is the same watchman whom we get to
know as resistance when we try to lift the repression by means of
the analytic treatment.
Now I know you will say that these ideas are both crude and
fantastic and quite impermissible in a scientific account. I
know that they are crude: and, more than that, I know that
they are incorrect, and, if I am not very much mistaken, I
already have something better to take their place.12*Whether it
will seem to you equally fantastic I cannot tell. They are pre­
liminary working hypotheses, like Ampere’s manikin swim­
ming in the electric current,8 and they are not to be despised
in so far as they are of service in making our observations intel­
ligible. I should like to assure you that these crude hypotheses
of the two rooms, the watchman at the threshold between them
and consciousness as a spectator at the end of the second room,
must nevertheless be very far-reaching approximations to the
real facts. And I should like to hear you admit that our terms,
‘unconscious’, ‘preconscious’ and ‘conscious’, prejudge things
far less and are far easier to justify than others which have been
proposed or are in use, such as ‘subconscious’, ‘paraconscious’,
‘intraconscious’ and the like.4*
1 [‘Bewusstseinsunfahig.’ The term is due to Breuer, who constructed
it on the model of ‘hoffahig' (‘admissible to Court’, ‘having the entree’).
See Section 5 of his contribution to Studies on Hysteria (1895J), Standard
Ed., 2, 225 n.]
2 [What Freud had in mind is not obvious.]
8 [A.-M. Ampere (1775-1836), one of the founders of the science of
electro-magnetism, made use of a magnetic metal manikin in one of
his early experiments establishing the relation between electricity and
magnetism.]
1 [Freud gives an explanation of his objection to the term ‘sub-

XIX. RESISTANCE AND REPRESSION

297

It will therefore be of greater importance to me if you warn
me that an arrangement of the mental apparatus, such as I
have here assumed in order to explain neurotic symptoms, must
necessarily claim general validity and must give us information
about normal functioning as well. You will, of course, be quite
right in this. At the moment we cannot pursue this implication
further; but our interest in the psychology of the forming of
symptoms cannot but be increased to an extraordinary extent if
there is a prospect, through the study of pathological conditions,
of obtaining access to the normal mental events which are so
well concealed.
Perhaps you recognize, moreover, what it is that supports our
hypotheses of the two systems, and their relation to each other
and to consciousness? After all, the watchman between the un­
conscious and the preconscious is nothing else than the censor­
ship, to which, as we found, the form taken by the manifest
dream is subject. [Cf. Lecture IX, p. 139 above.] The day’s
residues, which we recognized as the instigators of the dream,
were preconscious material which, at night-time and in the
state of sleep, had been under the influence of unconscious and
repressed wishful impulses; they had been able, in combination
with those impulses and thanks to their energy, to construct the
latent dream. Under the dominance of the unconscious system
this material had been worked over (by condensation and dis­
placement) in a manner which is unknown or only exception­
ally permissible in normal mental life—that is, in the precon­
scious system. We came to regard this difference in their
manner of operating as what characterizes the two systems; the
relation which the preconscious has to consciousness was re­
garded by us merely as an indication of its belonging to one of
the two systems.1 Dreams are not pathological phenomena; they
can appear in any healthy person under the conditions of a
state of sleep. Our hypothesis about the structure of the mental
apparatus, which allows us to understand the formation alike
of dreams and of neurotic symptoms, has an incontrovertible
conscious’ near the end of Chapter II of his work on lay analysis
(1926e), Standard Ed., 20, 197-8. See also an Editor’s footnote to
Section I of‘The Unconscious’ (1915«), ibid., 14, 170.)
1 [Cf. the discussions at the end of Lectures XIII and XIV, pp. 212
and 227.]

298

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

claim to being taken into account in regard to normal mental
life as well.
That much is what we have to say for the moment about re­
pression. But it is only the precondition for the construction of
symptoms. Symptoms, as we know, are a substitute for some­
thing that is held back by repression. It is a long step further,
however, from repression to an understanding of this substitu­
tive structure. On this other side of the problem, these questions
arise out of our observation of repression: what kind of mental
impulses are subject to repression? by what forces is it accom­
plished? and for what motives? So far we have only one piece of
information on these points. In investigating resistance we have
learnt that it emanates from forces of the ego, from known and
latent character traits [p. 291 above]. It is these too, therefore,
that are responsible for repression, or at any rate they have a
share in it. We know nothing more at present.
At this point the second of the two observations which I men­
tioned to you earlier [at the opening of this Lecture] comes to
our help. It is quite generally the case that analysis allows us to
arrive at the intention of neurotic symptoms. This again will be
nothing new to you. I have already demonstrated it to you in
two cases of neurosis.1 But, after all, what do two cases amount
to? You are right to insist on its being demonstrated to you in
two hundred cases—in countless cases. The only trouble is that
I cannot do that. Once again, your own experience must serve
instead, or your belief, which on this point can appeal to the
unanimous reports of all psycho-analysts.
You will recollect that, in the two cases whose symptoms we
submitted to a detailed investigation, the analysis initiated us
into these patients’ most intimate sexual life. In the first case
we further recognized with particular clarity the intention or
purpose of the symptom we were examining; in the second case
this was perhaps somewhat concealed by a factor which will be
mentioned later [p. 300 below]. Well, every other case that we
submit to analysis would show us the same thing that we have
found in these two examples. In every instance we should be
introduced by the analysis into the patient’s sexual experiences
and wishes;'and in every instance we should be bound to see
1 [In Lecture XVII, p. 261 ff. above.]

XIX. RESISTANCE AND REPRESSION

299

that the symptoms served the same intention. We find that this
intention is the satisfaction of sexual wishes; the symptoms serve
for the patients’ sexual satisfaction; they are a substitute for
satisfaction of this kind, which the patients are without in their
lives.
Think of our first patient’s obsessional action. The woman
was without her husband, whom she loved intensely but with
whom she could not share her life on account of his deficiencies
and weaknesses. She had to remain faithful to him; she could
not put anyone else in his place. Her obsessional symptom gave
her what she longed for, set her husband on a pedestal, denied
and corrected his weaknesses and above all his impotence. This
symptom was fundamentally a wish-fulfilment, just like a
dream—and moreover, what is not always true of a dream, an
erotic wish-fulfilment. In the case of our second patient you
could at least gather that her ceremonial sought to obstruct in­
tercourse between her parents or prevent it from producing a
new baby. You will also probably have guessed that it was
at bottom endeavouring to put her herself in her mother’s
place. Once again, therefore, a setting-aside of interferences
with sexual satisfaction and a fulfilment of the patient’s own
sexual wishes. I shall soon come to the complication I have
hinted at.
I should like to anticipate, Gentlemen, the qualifications
which I shall have to make later in the universal validity of
these statements. I will therefore point out to you that all I
have said here about repression and the formation and meaning
of symptoms was derived from three forms of neurosis—anxiety
hysteria, conversion hysteria and obsessional neurosis—and
that in the first instance it is also valid only for these forms.
These three disorders, which we are accustomed to group to­
gether as 'transference neuroses',1 also circumscribe the region in
which psycho-analytic therapy can function. The other neuroses
have been far less thoroughly studied by psycho-analysis; in one
group of them the impossibility of therapeutic influence has
been a reason for this neglect. Nor should you forget that
psycho-analysis is still a very young science, that preparing for
it costs much trouble and time, and that not at all long ago it
1 [The explanation of this term is given in a later lecture, p. 445
below.]
s.f. xvi—u

300

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

was being practised single-handed. Nevertheless, we are every­
where on the point of penetrating to an understanding of these
other disorders which are not transference neuroses. I hope
later to be able to introduce you to the extensions of our hypo­
theses and findings which result from adaptation to this new
material, and to show you that these further studies have not
led to contradictions but to the establishment of higher unities.1
If, then, everything I am saying here applies to the trans­
ference neuroses, let me first increase the value of symptoms by
a new piece of information. For a comparative study of the
determining causes of falling ill leads to a result which can be
expressed in a formula: these people fall ill in one way or
another offrustration, when reality prevents them from satisfying
their sexual wishes.2 You see how excellently these two findings
tally with each other. It is only thus that symptoms can be
properly viewed as substitutive satisfactions for what is missed
in life.
No doubt all kinds of objections can still be raised to the
assertion that neurotic symptoms are substitutes for sexual
satisfactions. I will mention two of them to-day. When you
yourselves have carried out analytic examinations of a con­
siderable number of neurotics, you will perhaps tell me, shaking
your head, that in a lot of cases my assertion is simply not true;
the symptoms seem rather to have the contrary purpose of ex­
cluding or of stopping sexual satisfaction. I will not dispute the
correctness of your interpretation. The facts in psycho-analysis
have a habit of being rather more complicated than we like. If
they were as simple as all that, perhaps it might not have
needed psycho-analysis to bring them to light. Indeed, some of
the features of our second patient’s ceremonial show signs of
this ascetic character with its hostility to sexual satisfaction:
when, for instance, she got rid of the clocks and watches
[p. 265], which had the magical meaning of avoiding erections
during the night [p. 267], or when she tried to guard against
flower-pots falling and breaking [p. 265], which was equivalent
to protecting her virginity [p. 267]. In some other cases of bed­
ceremonials, which I have been able to analyse, this negative
character was far more outspoken; the ceremonial might con1 [See the discussion of narcissism in Lecture XXVI.]
* [This is discussed in greater detail in Lecture XXII, p. 344 ff. below.]

XIX. RESISTANCE AND REPRESSION

301

sist exclusively of defensive measures against sexual memories
and temptations. However, we have already found often enough
that in psycho-analysis opposites imply no contradiction.1 We
might extend our thesis and say that symptoms aim either at a
sexual satisfaction or at fending it off, and that on the whole the
positive, wish-fulfilling character prevails in hysteria and the
negative, ascetic one in obsessional neurosis. If symptoms can
serve the purpose both of sexual satisfaction and of its opposite,
there is an excellent basis for this double-sidedness or polarity
in a part of their mechanism which I have so far not been able
to mention. For, as we shall hear, they are the products of a
compromise and arise from the mutual interference between
two opposing currents; they represent not only the repressed but
also the repressing force which had a share in their origin. One
side or the other may be more strongly represented; but it is
rarely that one influence is entirely absent. In hysteria a con­
vergence of both intentions in the same symptom is usually
achieved. In obsessional neurosis the two portions are often
separated; the symptom then becomes diphasic [falls into two
stages] and consists in two actions, one after the other, which
cancel each other out.2
We shall not be able to dismiss a second objection so easily.
If you survey a fairly long series of interpretations of symptoms,
you will probably start by judging that the concept of a sub­
stitutive sexual satisfaction has been stretched to its extreme
limits in them. You will not fail to emphasize the fact that these
symptoms offer nothing real in the way of satisfaction, that
often enough they are restricted to the revival of a sensation or
the representation of a phantasy derived from a sexual complex.
And you will further point out that these supposed sexual satis­
factions often take on a childish and discreditable form, approxi­
mate to an act of masturbation perhaps, or recall dirty kinds of
naughtiness which are forbidden even to children—habits of
which they have been broken. And, going on from this, you
will also express surprise that we are representing as a sexual
satisfaction what would rather have to be described as the
1 [E.g. in Lecture XI, p. 178 above.]
* [Examples of this will be found, with a discussion, in Section E of
Part I of the ‘Rat Man’ case history (1909J), Standard Ed., 10, 191-2
and footnote.]

302

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

satisfaction of lusts that are cruel or horrible or would even
have to be called unnatural. We shall come to no agreement,
Gentlemen, on this latter point till we have made a thorough
investigation of the sexual life of human beings and till, in
doing so, we have decided what it is that we are justified in
calling ‘sexual’.

LECTURE XX

THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS1
i
।
।

.
l
‘
'

,
|
k

i

Ladies and Gentlemen,—One would certainly have supposed
that there could be no doubt as to what is to be understood by
‘sexual’. First and foremost, what is sexual is something im­
proper, something one ought not to talk about. I have been told
that the pupils of a celebrated psychiatrist made an attempt
once to convince their teacher of how frequently the symptoms
of hysterical patients represent sexual things. For this purpose
they took him to the bedside of a female hysteric, whose attacks
were an unmistakable imitation of the process of childbirth.
But with a shake of his head he remarked: ‘Well, there’s nothing
sexual about childbirth.’ Quite right. Childbirth need not in
every case be something improper.
I see that you take offence at my joking about such serious
things. But it is not altogether a joke. Seriously, it is not easy
to decide what is covered by the concept ‘sexual’. Perhaps the
only suitable definition would be ‘everything that is related to
the distinction between the two sexes’. But you will regard that
as colourless and too comprehensive. If you take the fact of the
sexual act as the central point, you will perhaps define as sexual
everything which, with a view to obtaining pleasure, is con­
cerned with the body, and in particular with the sexual organs,
of someone of the opposite sex, and which in the last resort aims
at the union of the genitals and the performance of the sexual
act. But if so you will really not be very far from the equation
of what is sexual with what is improper, and childbirth will
really not be anything sexual. If, on the other hand, you take
the reproductive function as the nucleus of sexuality, you risk
excluding a whole number of things which are not aimed at
1 [Freud’s principal work on this subject was, of course, his Three
Essays on the Theory ofSexuality (1905d), to which he made a large number
of additions and corrections in a succession of editions over the
subsequent twenty years. A list of his chief other contributions to the
subject is given in an appendix to the work in Standard Ed., 7, 244-5.
The material in this and the following lecture is mainly derived from
the Three Essoyj.]
303

304

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

reproduction but which are certainly sexual, such as masturba­
tion and perhaps even kissing. But we are already prepared to
find that attempts at a definition always lead to difficulties;
so let us renounce the idea of doing better in this particular
case. We may suspect that in the course of the development
of the concept ‘sexual’ something has happened which has
resulted in what Silberer has aptly called an ‘error of superimposition’.1

On the whole, indeed, when we come to think of it, we are
not quite at a loss in regard to what it is that people call sexual.
Something which combines a reference to the contrast between
the sexes, to the search for pleasure, to the reproductive func­
tion and to the characteristic of something that is improper and
must be kept secret—some such combination will serve for all
practical purposes in everyday life. But for science that is not
enough. By means of careful investigations (only made pos­
sible, indeed, by disinterested self-discipline) we have come to
know groups of individuals whose ‘sexual life’ deviates in the
most striking way from the usual picture of the average. Some
of these ‘perverse’ people have, we might say, struck the dis­
tinction between the sexes off their programme. Only members
of their own sex can rouse their sexual wishes; those of the other
sex, and especially their sexual parts, are not a sexual object
for them at all, and in extreme cases are an object of disgust.
This implies, of course, that they have abandoned any share in
reproduction. We call such people homosexuals or inverts.
They are men and women who are often, though not always,
irreproachably fashioned in other respects, of high intellectual
and ethical development, the victims only of this one fatal
deviation. Through the mouth of their scientific spokesmen
they represent themselves as a special variety of the human
species—a ‘third sex’ which has a right to stand on an equal
footing beside the other two. We shall perhaps have an oppor­
tunity of examining their claims critically. [Cf. p. 307 f. below.]
Of course they are not, as they also like to assert, an ‘elite’ of man-

E

1 ^Uberdeckungsfehler.’ See Silberer, 1914, 161. What Silberer seems
to have in mind is mistakenly thinking that you are looking at a single
thing, when in fact you are looking at two different things superimposed
on each other.]

1

XX. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS

'

,

i
1
,

l
1
t
?

1

j

305

!

kind; there are at least as many inferior and useless individuals
among them as there are among those of a different sexual
kind.
This class of perverts at any rate behave to their sexual objects
in approximately the same way as normal people do to theirs.
But we now come to a long series of abnormaLpeople whose
sexual activity diverges more and more widely/from what seems
desirable to a sensible person. In their multiplicity and strange­
ness they can only be compared to the grotesque monsters
painted by Breughel for the temptation of St? Anthony or to
the long procession of vanished gods and believers which Flau­
bert leads past, before the eyes of his pious penitent.1 Such a
medley calls for some kind of arrangement if it is not to confuse
our senses. We accordingly divide them into those in whom,
like the homosexuals, the sexual object has been changed, and
others in whom the sexual aim is what has primarily been
altered. The first group includes those who have renounced the
union of the two genitals and who replace the genitals of one of
the couple engaged in the sexual act by some other part or
region of the body; in this they disregard the lack of suitable
organic arrangements as well as any impediment offered by
feelings of disgust. (They replace the vulva, for instance, by the
mouth or anus.) Others follow, who, it is true, still retain the
genitals as an object—not, however, on account of their sexual
function but of other functions in which the genital plays a part
either for anatomical reasons or because of its propinquity. We
find from them that the excretory functions, which have been
put aside as improper during the upbringing of children, retain
the ability to attract the whole of sexual interest. Then come
others again, who have abandoned the genital as an object
altogether, and have taken some other part of the body as the
object they desire—a woman’s breast, a foot or a plait of hair.
After them come others for whom parts of the body are of no
importance but whose every wish is satisfied by a piece of
clothing, a shoe, a piece of underclothing—the fetishists. Later
in the procession come people who require the whole object
indeed, but make quite definite demands of it—strange or
horrible—even that it must have become a defenceless corpse,

'
I

1 [Flaubert’s La tentation de Saint Antoine, Part V of the final version
(1874).]

il
|

j
|

J
!

|

306

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

and who, using criminal violence, make it into one so that they
may enjoy it. But enough of this kind of horror!
The second group is led by perverts who have made what is
normally only an introductory or preparatory act into the aim
of their sexual wishes. They are people whose desire it is to look
at the other person or to feel him or to watch him in the per­
formance of his intimate actions, or who expose parts of their
own bodies which should be covered, in the obscure expectation
that they may be rewarded by a corresponding action in return.
Next come the sadists, puzzling people whose tender endea­
vours have no other aim than to cause pain and torment to their
object, ranging from humiliation to severe physical injuries;
and, as though to counterbalance them, their counterparts,
the masochists, whose only pleasure it is to suffer humiliations
and torments of every kind from their loved object either sym­
bolically or in reality. There are still others in whom several of
these abnormal preconditions are united and intertwined; and
lastly, we must learn that each of these groups is to be found in
two forms: alongside of those who seek their sexual satisfaction
in reality are those who are content merely to imagine that satis­
faction, who need no real object at all, but can replace it by
their phantasies.
Now there cannot be the slightest doubt that all these crazy,
eccentric and horrible things really constitute the sexual
activity of these people. Not only do they themselves regard
them as such and are aware that they are substitutes for each
other, but we must admit that they play the same part in their
lives as normal sexual satisfaction does in ours; they make the
same, often excessive sacrifices for them, and we can trace both
in the rough and in finer detail the points at which these abnor­
malities are based on what is normal and the points at which
they diverge from it. Nor can you fail to notice that here once
again you find the characteristic of being improper, which
clings to sexual activity, though here it is for the most part
intensified to the point of being abominable.
Well, Ladies and Gentlemen, what attitude are we to adopt
to these unusual kinds of sexual satisfaction? Indignation, an
expression of our personal repugnance and an assurance that
we ourselves do not share these lusts will obviously be of no

XX. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS

307

help. Indeed, that is not what we have been asked for. When all
is said and done, what we have here is a field of phenomena like
any other. A denial in the form of an evasive suggestion that
after all these are only rarities and curiosities would be easy to
refute. On the contrary, we are dealing with quite common and
widespread phenomena. If, however, it is argued that we need
not allow our views of sexual life to be misled by them because
they are one and all aberrations and deviations of the sexual
instinct, a serious answer is called for. Unless we can under­
stand these pathological forms of sexuality and can co-ordinate
them with normal sexual life, we cannot understand normal
sexuality either. In short, it remains an unavoidable task to give
a complete theoretical account of how it is that these perver­
sions can occur and of their connection with what is described
as normal sexuality.
We shall be helped in this by a piece of information and two
fresh observations. We owe the former to Iwan Bloch [1902-3].
It corrects the view that all these perversions are ‘signs of
degeneracy’ by showing that aberrations of this kind from the
sexual aim, loosenings like these of the tie with the sexual
object, have occurred from time immemorial, in all periods
known to us, among all peoples, the most primitive and the
most civilized, and have occasionally obtained toleration and
general recognition. The two observations were derived from
the psycho-analytic investigation of neurotics; they are bound to
have a decisive influence on our view of the sexual perversions.

I have said that neurotic symptoms are substitutes for sexual
satisfaction [p. 299], and I indicated to you that the confirma­
tion of this assertion by the analysis of symptoms would come
up against a number of difficulties. For it can only be justified
if under ‘sexual satisfaction’ we include the satisfaction of what
are called perverse sexual needs, since an interpretation of
symptoms of that kind is forced upon us with surprising fre­
quency. The claim made by homosexuals or inverts to being
exceptions collapses at once when we learn that homosexual
impulses are invariably discovered in every single neurotic, and
that a fair number of symptoms give expression to this latent
inversion. Those who call themselves homosexuals are only
the conscious and manifest inverts, whose number is nothing

308

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

compared to that of the latent homosexuals. We are compelled,
however, to regard choice of an object of one’s own sex as a
divergence in erotic life which is of positively habitual occur­
rence, and we are learning more and more to ascribe an
especially high importance to it. No doubt this does not do away
with the differences between manifest homosexuality and a
normal attitude; their practical significance remains, but their
theoretical value is greatly diminished. We have even found
that a particular disease, paranoia, which is not to be counted
among the transference neuroses, regularly arises from an
attempt to fend off excessively strong homosexual impulses.1
You will perhaps recall that one of our patients (p. 262)
behaved in her obsessional action like a man, her own husband
whom she had left; neurotic women very commonly produce
symptoms in this way in the character of a man. Even if this is
not actually to be regarded as homosexuality, it is closely re­
lated to its preconditions.
As you probably know, the hysterical neurosis can produce
its symptoms in any system of organs and so disturb any func­
tion. Analysis shows that in this way all the so-called perverse ,
impulses which seek to replace the genital by some other organ
manifest themselves: these organs are then behaving like subititutive genitals. The symptoms of hysteria have actually led
us to the view that the bodily organs, besides the functional
part they play, must be recognized as having a sexual (eroto­
genic) significance, and that the execution of the first of these
tasks is disturbed if the second of them makes too many claims.2
Countless sensations and innervations which we come across as
symptoms of hysteria in organs that have no apparent connec­
tion with sexuality are in this way revealed to us as being in the
nature of fulfilments of perverse sexual impulses in relation to
which other organs have acquired the significance of the sexual
parts. We learn too to what a large extent the organs for the
intake of nourishment and for excretion can in particular
become the vehicles of sexual excitation. Here, then, we have
the same thing that we were shown by the perversions; only
in their case it was visible easily and unmistakably, whereas in
1 [Paranoia is further discussed in Lecture XXVI, p. 423 ff. below.]
1 [This point is discussed at greater length in a paper on psychogenic
disturbance of vision (1910£), Standard Ed., 11, 215 ff.]

XX. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS 309

hysteria we have to take a circuitous path by way of the inter­
pretation of symptoms, and do not then ascribe the perverse
sexual impulses concerned to the subject’s consciousness but
locate them in his unconscious.
Of the many symptomatic pictures in which obsessional
neurosis appears, the most important turn out to be those pro­
voked by the pressure of excessively strong sadistic sexual
impulses (perverse, therefore, in their aim). The symptoms,
indeed, in accordance with the structure of an obsessional
neurosis, serve predominantly as a defence against these wishes
or give expression to the struggle between satisfaction and de­
fence. But satisfaction does not come off too badly either; it
succeeds in roundabout ways in putting itself into effect in the
patients’ behaviour and is preferably directed against them­
selves and makes them into self-tormentors. Other forms of the
neurosis, the brooding kinds, correspond to an excessive sexua­
lization of actions which ordinarily have their place on the path
to normal sexual satisfaction—an excessive sexualization of
wanting to look or to touch or to explore. Here we have the
explanation of the great importance of the fear of touching and
of the obsession for washing. An unsuspectedly large proportion
of obsessional actions may be traced back to masturbation, of
which they are disguised repetitions and modifications;1 it is a
familiar fact that masturbation, though a single and uniform
action, accompanies the most various forms of sexual phantasying.
I should not have much difficulty in giving you a far more
intimate picture of the relations between perversion and neu­
rosis; but I think what I have already said will serve our pur­
pose. We must however guard against being misled by what I
have told you of the meaning of symptoms into over-estimating
the frequency and intensity of people’s perverse inclinations. It
is possible, as you have heard [p. 300], to fall ill of a neurosis as
a result of a frustration of normal sexual satisfaction. But when
a real frustration like this occurs, the need moves over on to
abnormal methods of sexual excitation. You will later learn the
way in which this happens [p. 344 ff.]. But in any case you
1 [The mechanism of the development of obsessional actions is de­
scribed in detail in the paper on obsessions and religion (19074),
Standard Ed., 9, 123 ff.]

310

i

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

will realize that as a result of this ‘collateral’ damming-back
[of the normal sexual current] the perverse impulses must
emerge more strongly than they would have if normal sexual
satisfaction had met with no obstacle in the real world.1 More­
over a similar influence is to be recognized also as affecting the
manifest perversions. In some cases they are provoked or made
active if the normal satisfaction of the sexual instinct encounters
too great difficulties for temporary reasons or because of per­
manent social regulations.2 In other cases, it is true, the inclina­
tion to perversions is quite independent of such favouring
conditions; they are, we might say, the normal species of sexual
life for those particular individuals.
For the moment, perhaps, you may have an impression that
I have confused rather than explained the relation between
normal and perverse sexuality. But you must bear the following
consideration in mind. If it is true that increased difficulty in
obtaining normal sexual satisfaction in real life, or deprivation
of that satisfaction, brings out perverse inclinations in people
who had not shown any previously, we must suppose that there
was something in these people which came half-way to meet
the perversions; or, if you prefer it, the perversions must have
been present in them in a latent form.
And this brings us to the second novelty that I announced to
you [p. 307].3 For psycho-analytic research has had to concern
itself, too, with the sexual life of children, and this is because the
memories and associations arising during the analysis of symp­
toms [in adults] regularly led back to the early years of child­
hood. What we inferred from these analyses was later confirmed
point by point by direct observations of children.4 And it then
1 [This analogy of a collateral flow through intercommunicating
channels is more clearly explained in Section 6 of the first of Freud’s
Three Essays (1905d), Standard Ed., 1, 170. Cf. also below, p. 345.]
2 [This last point is discussed at length in Freud’s paper on ‘ “Civi­
lized” Sexual Morality and Modem Nervous Illness’ (1908J), Standard
Ed., 9, especially 200-1.]
8 [The first was the important part played in the neuroses by perverse
sexuality. What follows was touched on more briefly in Lecture XIII,
p. 208 ff. above.]
4 [The earliest of these direct observations were made in the case of
‘Little Hans’ (19094).]

!

6,

XX. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS 311
turned out that all these inclinations to perversion had their
roots in childhood, that children have a predisposition to all
of them and carry them out to an extent corresponding to
their immaturity—in short, that perverse sexuality is nothing
else than a magnified infantile sexuality split up into its separate
impulses.
At all events you will now see the perversions in a new light
and no longer fail to realize their connection with the sexual
life of human beings: but at the price of what surprises and of
what feelings of distress over these incongruities! No doubt you
will feel inclined at first to deny the whole business: the fact
that children have anything that can be described as sexual
life, the correctness of our observations and the justification for
finding any kinship between the behaviour of children and
what is later condemned as perversion. So allow me to begin
by explaining to you the motives for your opposition, and then
to present you with the sum of our observations. To suppose
that children have no sexual life—sexual excitations and needs
and a kind of satisfaction—but suddenly acquire it between the
ages of twelve and fourteen, would (quite apart from any
observations) be as improbable, and indeed senseless, biologic­
ally as to suppose that they brought no genitals with them into
the world and only grew them at the time of puberty. What
does awaken in them at this time is the reproductive function,
which makes use for its purposes of physical and mental
material already present. You are committing the error of con­
fusing sexuality and reproduction and by doing so you are
blocking your path to an understanding of sexuality, the per­
versions and the neuroses. This error is, however, a tendentious
one. Strangely enough, it has its source in the fact that you
yourselves were once children and, while you were children,
came under the influence of education. For society must under­
take as one of its most important educative tasks to tame and
restrict the sexual instinct when it breaks out as an urge to
reproduction, and to subject it to an individual will which is
identical with the bidding of society. It is also concerned to
postpone the full development of the instinct till the child
shall have reached a certain degree of intellectual maturity, for,
with the complete irruption of the sexual instinct, educability
is for practical purposes at an end. Otherwise, the instinct

312

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

would break down every dam and wash away the laboriously
erected work of civilization. Nor is the task of taming it ever an
easy one; its success is sometimes too small, sometimes too
great. The motive of human society is in the last resort an
economic one; since it does not possess enough provisions to
keep its members alive unless they work, it must restrict the
number of its members and divert their energies from sexual
activity to work. It is faced, in short, by the eternal, primaeval
exigencies of life, which are with us to this day.1
Experience must no doubt have taught the educators that
the task of making the sexual will of the new generation trac­
table could only be carried out if they began to exercise their
influence very early, if they did not wait for the storm of
puberty but intervened already in the sexual life of children
which is preparatory to it. For this reason almost all infantile
sexual activities were forbidden to children and frowned upon;
an ideal was set up of making the life of children asexual, and
in course of time things came to the point at which people
really believed they were asexual and thereafter science pro­
nounced this as its doctrine. To avoid contradicting their
belief and their intentions, people since then overlook the sexual
activities of children (no mean achievement) or are content in
science to take a different view of them. Children are pure and
innocent, and anyone who describes them otherwise can be
charged with being an infamous blasphemer against the tender
and sacred feelings of mankind.
Children are alone in not falling in with these conventions.
They assert their animal rights with complete naiveti and give
constant evidence that they have still to travel the road to
purity. Strangely enough, the people who deny the existence
of sexuality in children do not on that account become milder
in their educational efforts but pursue the manifestations of
what they deny exists with the utmost severity—describing
them as ‘childish naughtinesses’. It is also of the highest theo­
retical interest that the period of life which contradicts the
prejudice of an asexual childhood most glaringly—the years of
a child’s life up to the age of five or six—is afterwards covered
in most people by the veil of amnesia which is only completely
torn away by an analytic enquiry, though it has been per1 [See p. 22 f. above.]

1

XX. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS 313

meable earlier for the construction of a few dreams. [Cf. p. 201
above.]
I will now set out before you what is most definitely known
about the sexual life of children. Let me at the same time, for
convenience sake, introduce the conceptof‘libido’. On the exact
analogy of ‘hunger’, we use ‘libido’ as the name of the force
(in this case that of the sexual instinct, as in the case of hunger
that of the nutritive instinct) by which the instinct manifests
itself. Other concepts, such as sexual ‘excitation’ and ‘satis­
faction’, call for no explanation. You yourselves will easily
perceive that the sexual activities of infants in arms are mostly
a matter of interpretation, or you will probably use that as a
ground of objection. These interpretations are arrived at on the
basis of analytic examinations made by tracing from the symp­
toms backwards. In an infant the first impulses of sexuality
make their appearance attached to other vital functions. His
main interest is, as you know, directed to the intake of nourish­
ment; when children fall asleep after being sated at the breast,
they show an expression of blissful satisfaction which will be
repeated later in life after the experience of a sexual orgasm.
This would be too little on which to base an inference. But we
observe how an infant will repeat the action of taking in nour­
ishment without making a demand for further food; here,
then, he is not actuated by hunger. We describe this as sensual
sucking,1 and the fact that in doing this he falls asleep once
more with a blissful expression shows us that the act of sensual
sucking has in itself alone brought him satisfaction. Soon, as
we know, things come to a point at which he cannot go to sleep
without having sucked. A paediatrician in Budapest, Dr.
Lindner [1879], was the first to point out long ago the sexual
nature of this activity. Those who are in charge of children,
and who have no theoretical views on the subject, seem to form
a similar judgement of sucking. They have no doubt of its only
purpose being to obtain pleasure, class it as one of a child’s
‘naughtinesses’ and compel him to abandon it by causing him
distress, if he will not give it up of his own accord. Thus we
learn that infants perform actions which have no purpose other
1 [The German nursery terms here used are ‘lutschen1 or ‘ludeln’, for
which there is no obvious English equivalent.!

314

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

than obtaining pleasure. It is our belief that they first experi­
ence this pleasure in connection with taking nourishment
but that they soon learn to separate it from that accompanying
condition. We can only refer this pleasure to an excitation of
the areas of the mouth and lips; we call those parts of the body
‘erotogenic zones’ and describe the pleasure derived from suck­
ing as a sexual one. We shall no doubt have to discuss further
whether this description is justifiable.
If an infant could speak, he would no doubt pronounce the
act of sucking at his mother’s breast by far the most important
in his life. He is not far wrong in this, for in this single act he is
satisfying at once the two great vital needs. We are therefore
not surprised to learn from psycho-analysis how much psychical
importance the act retains all through life. Sucking at the
mother’s breast is the starting-point of the whole of sexual life,
the unmatched prototype of every later sexual satisfaction, to
which phantasy often enough recurs in times of need. This
sucking involves making the mother’s breast the first object of
the sexual instinct. I can give you no idea of the important
bearing of this first object upon the choice of every later object,
of the profound effects it has in its transformations and sub­
stitutions in even the remotest regions of our sexual life. But at
first the infant, in his sucking activity, gives up this object and
replaces it by a part of his own body. He begins to suck his
thumbs or his own tongue. In this way he makes himself inde­
pendent of the consent of the external world as regards gaining
pleasure, and besides this he increases it by adding the excita­
tion of a second area of his body. The erotogenic zones are not
all equally generous in yielding pleasure; it is therefore an
important experience when the infant, as Lindner reports,
discovers, in the course of feeling around, the specially excitable
regions afforded by his genitals and so finds his way from
sucking to masturbation.
In forming this opinion of sensual sucking we have already
become acquainted with two decisive characteristics of in­
fantile sexuality. It makes its appearance attached to the satis­
faction of the major organic needs, and it behaves auto-erotically
—that is, it seeks and finds its objects in the infant’s own body.
What has been shown most clearly in connection with the
intake of nourishment is repeated in part with the excretions.

XX. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS 315

We conclude that infants have feelings of pleasure in the pro­
cess of evacuating urine and faeces and that they soon contrive
to arrange those actions in such a way as to bring them the
greatest possible yield of pleasure through the corresponding
excitations of the erotogenic zones of the mucous membrane.
It is here for the first time (as Lou Andreas-Salome [1916] has
subtly perceived) that they encounter the external world as an
inhibiting power, hostile to their desire for pleasure, and have
a glimpse of later conflicts both external and internal. An infant
must not produce his excreta at whatever moment he chooses,
but when other people decide that he shall. In order to induce
him to forgo these sources of pleasure, he is told that everything
that has to do with these functions is improper and must be
kept secret. This is where he is first obliged to exchange pleasure
for social respectability. To begin with, his attitude to his
excreta themselves is quite different. He feels no disgust at his
faeces, values them as a portion of his own body with which he
will not readily part, and makes use of them as his first ‘gift’,
to distinguish people whom he values especially highly. Even
after education has succeeded in its aim of making these in­
clinations alien to him, he carries on his high valuation of
faeces in his estimate of ‘gifts’ and ‘money’. On the other hand
he seems to regard his achievements in urinating with peculiar
pride.1
I know you have been wanting for a long time to interrupt
me and exclaim: ‘Enough of these atrocities! You tell us that
defaecating is a source of sexual satisfaction, and already
exploited in infancy! that faeces is a valuable substance and
that the anus is a kind of genital! We don’t believe all that—
but we do understand why paediatricians and educationists
have given a wide berth to psycho-analysis and its findings.’
No, Gentlemen. You have merely forgotten that I have been
trying to introduce the facts of infantile sexual life to you in con­
nection with the facts of the sexual perversions. Why should you
1 [The relations between faeces and money were discussed by Freud
in a paper on ‘Character and Anal Erotism’ (19086) and in a later one,
almost contemporary with the present lecture, ‘On Transformations of
Instinct as Exemplified in Anal Erotism’ (1917c). The connection
between micturition and pride had been shown in a dream-analysis
in The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), Standard Ed., 5, 469.]
s.f.

xvi—x

316

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

not be aware that for a large number of adults, homosexual and
heterosexual alike, the anus does really take over the role of the
vagina in sexual intercourse? And that there are many people
who retain a voluptuous feeling in defaecating all through
their lives and describe it as being far from small? As regards
, interest in the act of defaecation and enjoyment in watching
someone else defaecating, you can get children themselves to
confirm the fact when they are a few years older and able to
tell you about it. Of course, you must not have systematically
intimidated them beforehand, or they will quite understand
that they must be silent on the subject. And as to the other
things that you are anxious not to believe, I will refer you to
the findings of analysis and of the direct observation of children
and will add that it calls for real ingenuity not to see all this
or to see it differently. Nor do I complain if you find the kinship
between infantile sexual activity and sexual perversions some­
thing very striking. But it is in fact self-evident: if a child has
a sexual life at all it is bound to be of a perverse kind; for, ex­
cept for a few obscure hints, children are without what makes
sexuality into the reproductive function. On the other hand, the
abandonment of the reproductive function is the common
feature of all perversions. We actually describe a sexual activity
as perverse if it has given up the aim of reproduction and pur­
sues the attainment of pleasure as an aim independent of it.
So, as you will see, the breach and turning-point in the develop­
ment of sexual life lies in its becoming subordinate to the
purposes of reproduction. Everything that happens before this
turn of events and equally everything that disregards it and
that aims solely at obtaining pleasure is given the unconplimentary name of ‘perverse’ and as such is proscribed.
Allow me, therefore, to proceed with my brief account of
infantile sexuality. What I have already reported of two systems
of organs [nutritional and excretory] might be confirmed in
reference to the others. A child’s sexual life is indeed made up
entirely of the activities of a number of component instincts
which seek, independently of one another, to obtain pleasure,
in part from the subject’s own body and in part already from
an external object. Among these organs the genitals come into
prominence very soon. There are people in whom obtaining
pleasure from their own genitals, without the assistance of any

XX. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS 317

other genitals or of an object, continues uninterruptedly from
infantile masturbation to the unavoidable masturbation1 of
puberty and persists for an indefinite length of time afterwards.
Incidentally, the topic of masturbation is not one that can be so
easily disposed of: it is something that calls for examination
from many angles.1
2
Though I am anxious to cut short this discussion still further,
I must nevertheless tell you a little about the sexual researches
of children: they are too characteristic of infantile sexuality
and of too great significance for the symptomatology of the
neuroses to be passed over.3 Infantile sexual researches begin
very early, sometimes before the third year of life. They do not
relate to the distinction between the sexes,45for this means noth­
ing to children, since they (or at any rate boys) attribute the
same male genital to both sexes. If, afterwards, a boy makes the
discovery of the vagina from seeing his little sister or a girl
playmate, he tries, to begin with, to disavow the evidence of his
senses, for he cannot imagine a human creature like himself
who is without such a precious portion. Later on, he takes
fright at the possibility thus presented to him; and any threats
that may have been made to him earlier, because he took too
intense an interest in his little organ, now produce a deferred
effect. He comes under the sway of the castration complex,® the
1 [‘Notonanie.’ Literally, masturbation by necessity, i.e. forced on the
subject by circumstances.]
’ [Freud’s fullest remarks on the subject are in his ‘Contribution to
a Discussion on Masturbation’ (1912/), Standard Ed., 12, 241 ff., where
an Editor’s Note gives further references.]
3 [See ‘On the Sexual Theories of Children’ (1908c).]
4 [This statement and the related one at the beginning of the next
paragraph were corrected by Freud later, in a footnote to his paper on
the anatomical distinction between the sexes (1925;), Standard Ed., 19,
252 n. He there argues that the problem of sex-distinction came first
and that of the origin of babies afterwards, at any rate in girls.]
5 [This has already been mentioned above (on p. 208), and appears
again below (on p. 368 ff.). The first published discussions on the cas­
tration complex appeared in Freud’s case history of ‘Little Hans’
(19093), though it had been referred to in an earlier paper on the
sexual theories of children (1908c), Standard Ed., 9, 217. Its relation to
the Oedipus complex was fully examined in later years, more particu­
larly in Freud’s papers on ‘The Dissolution of the Oedipus Complex’
(1924J) and on the anatomical distinction between the sexes (1925;).]

318

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

form taken by which plays a great part in the construction of
his character if he remains normal, in his neurosis if he falls ill,
and in his resistances if he comes into analytic treatment. As
regards little girls, we can say of them that they feel greatly at a
disadvantage owing to their lack of a big, visible penis, that
they envy boys for possessing one and that, in the main for this
reason, they develop a wish to be a man—a wish that re­
emerges later on, in any neurosis that may arise if they meet
with a mishap in playing a feminine part. In her childhood,
moreover, a girl’s clitoris takes on the role of a penis entirely:
it is characterized by special excitability and is the area in
which auto-erotic satisfaction is obtained. The process of a girl’s
becoming a woman depends very much on the clitoris passing
on this sensitivity to the vaginal orifice in good time and com­
pletely. In cases of what is known as sexual anaesthesia in women
the clitoris has obstinately retained its sensitivity.
The sexual interest of children begins by turning, rather, to
the problem of where babies come from1—the same problem
which underlies the question put by the Theban Sphinx—and
it is most often raised by egoistic fears on the arrival of a new
baby. The reply which is ready to hand in the nursery, that
babies are brought by the stork [p. 160], comes up against
disbelief on the part even of small children far oftener than we
are aware. The sense of being defrauded of the truth by the
grown-ups contributes much to making children feel lonely and
to developing their independence. But a child is not in a position
to solve this problem by his own means. His undeveloped sexual
constitution sets definite limits to his power of perception. He
begins by supposing that babies come from people taking in
something special in their food, nor does he know that only
women can have babies. Later he becomes aware of this limita­
tion and ceases to regard eating as the origin of babies—though
the theory persists in fairy tales. When the child has grown
bigger, he soon notices that his father must play some part in
getting babies, but he cannot guess what. If he happens to
witness a sexual act, he regards it as an attempt at subjugation,
a struggle, and this is the sadistic misunderstanding of coition.
But at first he does not connect this act with the coming into
being of a baby. So, too, if he finds traces of blood on his
1 [See the last footnote but one.]

XX. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS

319

mother’s bed or on her underclothes, he takes it as a sign that
she has been injured by his father. Still later in childhood, he
no doubt suspects that the man’s sexual organ has an essential
share in producing babies, but the only function he can attri­
bute to that part of the body is micturition.
From the very first, children are at one in thinking that
babies must be born through the bowel; they must make their
appearance like lumps of faeces. This theory is not abandoned
until all anal interests have been deprived of their value, and
it is then replaced by the hypothesis that the navel comes open
or that the area of the breast between the nipples is where birth
takes place. In this way the child in the course of his researches
comes nearer to the facts about sex, or, feeling at a loss owing
to his ignorance, he passes them by till, usually in the years
before puberty, he is given what is as a rule a depreciatory and
incomplete explanation, which often produces traumatic
effects.

You will no doubt have heard, Gentlemen, that in psychoanalysis the concept of what is sexual has been unduly extended
in order to support the theses of the sexual causation of the
neuroses and the sexual meaning of symptoms. You are now in
a position to judge for yourselves whether this extension is
unjustified. We have only extended the concept of sexuality
far enough to be able to comprise the sexual life of perverts and
of children. We have, that is to say, given it back its true com­
pass. What is called sexuality outside psycho-analysis relates
only to a restricted sexual life, which serves the purpose of
reproduction and is described as normal.

;
i
f
1

I
I
,
'

'

LECTURE XXI

THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIDO
AND THE SEXUAL ORGANIZATIONS
Gentlemen,—I am under the impression that I have not suc­
ceeded in bringing home to you quite convincingly the import­
ance of the perversions for our view of sexuality, and I should
therefore like so far as I can to improve and supplement what
I have said.
It is not the case that the perversions alone would have
obliged us to make the change in the concept of sexuality which
has brought such violent contradictions down on us. The study
of infantile sexuality had even more to do with it and it was the
concurrence of the two which was decisive for us. But the mani­
festations of infantile sexuality, however unmistakable they
may be in later childhood, seem to melt into indefiniteness to­
wards their beginnings. Anyone who chooses to disregard the
history of their development and their analytic context will deny
that they are of a sexual character and will attribute some un­
differentiated character to them instead. You must not forget
that at the moment we are not in possession of any generally
recognized criterion of the sexual nature of a process, apart,
once again, from a connection with the reproductive function
which we must reject as being too narrow-minded. The bio­
logical criteria, such as the periodicities of twenty-three and
twenty-eight days postulated by Wilhelm Fliess [1906], are still
highly debatable; the chemical characteristics of the sexual pro­
cess, which we may suspect, are still awaiting discovery. On the
other hand, the sexual perversions of adults are something tan­
gible and unambiguous. As is already shown by the name by
which they are universally known, they are unquestionably
sexual. Whether they are described as indications of degeneracy
or in any other way, no one has yet had the courage to class
them as anything but phenomena of sexual life. On their
account alone we are justified in asserting that sexuality and
reproduction do not coincide, for it is obvious that all of them
disavow the aim of reproduction.
320

XXI. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIDO

321

I find a parallel here which is not uninteresting. Whereas for
most people ‘conscious’ and ‘psychical’ are the same, we have
been obliged to extend the concept of ‘psychical’ and to recognize something ‘psychical’ that is not ‘conscious’. And in just
the same way, whereas other people declare that ‘sexual’ and
‘connected with reproduction’ (or, if you prefer to put it more
shortly, ‘genital’) are identical, we cannot avoid postulating
something ‘sexual’ that is not ‘genital’—has nothing to do with
reproduction. The similarity here is only a formal one, but it is
not without a deeper foundation.
But if the existence of sexual perversions is such a decisive
argument in this question, why has it not long since had its
effect and settled the matter? I really cannot say. I think it is
connected with the fact that these sexual perversions are subject
to a quite special ban, which has even affected theory and has
stood in the way of the scientific consideration of them. It is as
though no one could forget that they are not only something
disgusting but also something monstrous and dangerous—as
though people felt them as seductive, and had at bottom to fight
down a secret envy of those who were enjoying them. One is
reminded of the admission made by the condemnatory Landgraf in the famous Tannhauser parody:
‘Im Venusberg vergass er Ehr und Pflicht!
—Merkwiirdig, unser einem passiert
so etwas nicht.’1

In reality perverts are poor wretches, rather, who have to pay
extremely dear for their hard-won satisfaction.
What makes the activity of perverts so unmistakably sexual
in spite of all the strangeness of its objects and aims is the fact
that as a rule an act of perverse satisfaction nevertheless ends in
complete orgasm and voidance of the genital products. This is
of course only the result of the people concerned being adults.
In children orgasm and genital excretion are scarcely possible;
their place is taken by hints which are once more not recognized
as being clearly sexual.
1 [‘The Venusberg made him forget
Honour and Duty thus!—
Strange how these things don’t happen
To people such as us.’—By Nestroy (cf. p. 352s.).]

.
!
'

'

।

322

I

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

There is something else that I must add in order to complete
our view of sexual perversions. However infamous they may be,
however sharply they may be contrasted with normal sexual
activity, quiet consideration will show that some perverse trait
or other is seldom absent from the sexual life of normal people.
Even a kiss can claim to be described as a perverse act, since it
consists in the bringing together of two oral erotogenic zones in­
stead of the two genitals. Yet no one rejects it as perverse; on
the contrary, it is permitted in theatrical performances as a
softened hint at the sexual act. But precisely kissing can easily
turn into a complete perversion—if, that is to say, it becomes
so intense that a genital discharge and orgasm follow upon it
directly, an event that is far from rare. We can learn, too, that
for one person feeling and looking at the object are indispen­
sable preconditions of sexual enjoyment, that another person
will pinch or bite at the climax of sexual excitation, that the
highest pitch of excitement in lovers is not always provoked by
the genitals but by some other region of the object’s body, and
any number of similar things besides. There is no sense in ex­
cluding people with individual traits of this kind from the class
of the normal and putting them among the perverts. On the
contrary, we shall recognize more and more clearly that the
essence of the perversions lies not in the extension of the sexual
aim, not in the replacement of the genitals, not even always in
the variant choice of the object, but solely in the exclusiveness
with which these deviations are carried out and as a result of
which the sexual act serving the purpose of reproduction is put
on one side. In so far as the perverse actions are inserted in the
performance of the normal sexual act as preparatory or in­
tensifying contributions, they are in reality not perversions at all.
The gulf between normal and perverse sexuality is of course
very much narrowed by facts of this kind. It is an easy con­
clusion that normal sexuality has emerged out of something that
was in existence before it, by weeding out certain features of
that material as unserviceable and collecting together the rest in
order to subordinate them to a new aim, that of reproduction.
Before we make use of our familiarity with the perversions to
plunge once again into the study of infantile sexuality on the
basis of clearer premisses, I must draw your attention to an
important difference between them. Perverse sexuality is as a

XXI. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIDO

323

rule excellently centred: all its actions are directed to an aim—
usually to a single one; one component instinct has gained the
upper hand in it and is either the only one observable or has
subjected the others to its purposes. In that respect there is no
distinction between perverse and normal sexuality other than
the fact that their dominating component instincts and conse­
quently their sexual aims are different. In both of them, one
might say, a well-organized tyranny has been established, but
in each of the two a different family has seized the reins of
power. Infantile sexuality, on the other hand, lacks, speaking
generally, any such centring and organization; its separate com­
ponent instincts have equal rights, each of them goes its own
way to obtaining pleasure. Both the absence and the presence
of centring harmonize well, of course, with the fact that both
perverse and normal sexuality have arisen out of infantile
sexuality. Incidentally, there are also cases of perverse sexuality
which have a much greater resemblance to the infantile kind,
since in them numerous component instincts have put through
(or, more correctly, have persisted in) their aims independently
of one another. It is better in such cases to speak of infantilism
in sexual life rather than of a perversion.

Thus forearmed we can proceed to the consideration of a sug­
gestion which we shall certainly not be spared. ‘Why’, we shall
be asked, ‘are you so obstinate in describing as being already
sexuality what on your own evidence are indefinable manifesta­
tions in childhood out of which sexual life will later develop?
Why should you not be content instead with giving them a
physiological description and simply say that in an infant at the
breast we already observe activities, such as sensual sucking or
holding back the excreta, which show us that he is striving for
“organ-pleasure”?1 In that way you would have avoided the
hypothesis, so repugnant to every feeling, of the smallest babies
having a sexual life.’—Indeed, Gentlemen, I have no objection
at all to organ-pleasure. I know that even the supreme pleasure
1 [‘Organlust.9 The term occurs in ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’
(1915c), Standard Ed., 14, 126, where Freud seems to have used it for
the first time. He uses it again in the New Introductory Lectures (1933a),
ibid., 22, 98. The concept, of course, is familiar from the time of the Three
Essays (1905</), e.g. Standard Ed., 7, 197.]

324

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

of sexual union is only an organ-pleasure attached to the
activity of the genitals. But can you tell me when this originally
indifferent organ-pleasure acquires the sexual character which
it undoubtedly possesses in the later phases of development? Do
we know any more about ‘organ-pleasure’ than about sexuality?
You will reply that it gains its sexual character precisely when
the genitals begin to play their part; ‘sexual’ coincides with
‘genital’. You will even reject the objection raised by the per­
versions by pointing out to me that in the majority of perver­
sions a genital orgasm is after all aimed at, even if it is arrived
at by a method other than the union of the genitals. You are
certainly taking up a much stronger position in determining the
characteristics of what is sexual if you knock out of it the rela­
tion to reproduction which is made untenable by the perver­
sions and put genital activity in its place. But, if so, we are no
longer far apart: it is only a question of the genital organs
versus the other organs. What are you going to do, however,
about the numerous experiences which show you that the
genitals can be represented as regards their yield of pleasure by
other organs, as in the case of kissing or of the perverse practices
of voluptuaries or of the symptoms of hysteria? In that neurosis
it is quite usual for signs of stimulation, sensations and innerva­
tions, and even the processes of erection, which belong properly
to the genitals, to be displaced on to other, remote regions of
the body—as, for instance, by transposition upwards, to the
head and face. Being thus convinced that you have nothing to
catch hold of for your characterization of what is sexual, you
will no doubt have to make up your minds to follow my
example and extend the description of being ‘sexual’ to the
activities of early childhood, too, which strive for organ­
pleasure.
And now, for my justification, there are two other considera­
tions which I must ask you to take into account. As you know,
we call the dubious and indefinable pleasurable activities of
earliest childhood sexual because, in the course of analysis, we
arrive at them from the symptoms after passing through indis­
putably sexual material. They need not necessarily themselves
be sexual on that account—agreed! But take an analogous case.
Suppose we had no means of observing the development from
their seed of two dicotyledonous plants, the apple-tree and the

r
r
XXI. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIDO

325

bean, but that it was possible in both cases for us to trace their
development backwards from the fully developed individual
plant to the first seedling with two seed-leaves. The two seed­
leaves have a neutral appearance; they are just alike in both
cases. Am I then to suppose that they are really alike, and that
the specific difference between an apple-tree and a bean is only
introduced into the plants later? Or is it biologically more
correct to believe that this difference is already there in the
seedling, although I cannot observe any distinction in the seed­
leaves? But we are doing the same thing when we call the
pleasure in the activities of an infant-in-arms a sexual one. I
cannot discuss here whether each and every organ-pleasure
should be called a sexual one or whether, alongside of the
sexual one, there is another which does not deserve to be so
called. I know too little about organ-pleasure and its determinants; and, in view of the retrogressive character of analysis
in general, I cannot feel surprised if at the very end I arrive at
what are for the time being indefinable factors.
And one thing more! On the whole you will have gained very
little for what you want to assert—the sexual purity of children
—even if you succeed in convincing me that it would be better
to regard the activities of infants-in-arms as non-sexual. For the
sexual life of children is already free from all these doubts from
the third year of life onwards: at about that time the genitals
already begin to stir, a period of infantile masturbation—of
genital satisfaction, therefore—sets in, regularly perhaps. The
mental and social phenomena of sexual life need no longer be
absent; the choice of an object, an affectionate preference for
particular people, a decision, even, in favour of one of the two
sexes, jealousy—all these have been established by impartial
observations made independently of psycho-analysis and before
its time, and they can be confirmed by any observer who cares
to see them. You will object that you have never doubted the
early awakening of affection; you have only doubted whether
this affection bears a ‘sexual’ character. It is true that children
have already learnt to conceal this between the ages of three
and eight. But if you are attentive you will be able nevertheless
to collect enough evidence of the ‘sensual’ aims of this affection,
and whatever you still lack after that can easily be supplied in
plenty by the investigations of analysis. The sexual aims at this

।
,
'
,

1

i
I
I
1
|
।
i
!
;
!
1

,

I

326

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

period of life are intimately connected with the child’s contem­
porary sexual researches, of which I have given you some in­
stances [p. 317]. The perverse character of some of these aims
is of course dependent on the child’s constitutional immaturity,
for he has not yet discovered the aim that consists in the act of
copulation.
From about the sixth to the eighth year of life onwards, we
can observe a halt and retrogression in sexual development,
which, in cases where it is most propitious culturally, deserves
to be called a period of latency. The latency period may also
be absent: it need not bring with it any interruption of sexual
activity and sexual interests along the whole line. The majority
of experiences and mental impulses before the start of the
latency period now fall victim to infantile amnesia—the forget­
ting (already discussed by us [p. 199 ff.]) which veils our earliest
youth from us and makes us strangers to it. The task is set us in
every psycho-analysis of bringing this forgotten period back
into memory. It is impossible to avoid a suspicion that the be­
ginnings of sexual life which are included in that period have
provided the motive for its being forgotten—that this forgetting,
in fact, is an outcome of repression.
From the third year of life a child’s sexual life shows much
agreement with an adult’s. It differs from the latter, as we
already know, in lacking a firm organization under the primacy
of the genitals, in its inevitable traits of perversion and also, of
course, in the far lesser intensity of the whole trend. But from
the point of view of theory the most interesting phases of sexual,
or, as we will say, of libidinal, development lie earlier than this
point of time. This course of development takes place so rapidly
that we should probably never have succeeded in getting a firm
hold of its fleeting pictures by direct observation. It was only
with the help of the psycho-analytic investigation of the neuroses
that it became possible to discern the still earlier phases of the
development of the libido. These are nothing but constructions,
to be sure, but, if you carry out psycho-analyses in practice,
you will find that they are necessary and useful constructions.
You will soon learn how it comes about that pathology can here
put us in possession of conditions which we should inevitably
overlook in a normal subject.

T

XXI. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIDO

327

Accordingly, I can now describe to you the form taken by a
child’s sexual life before the establishment of the primacy of the
genitals, preparations for which are made in the first period of
infancy preceding the latency period and which is permanently
organized from puberty onwards. A kind of loose organization
which may be called ‘pregenital’ exists during this early period.
During this phase what stand in the forefront are not the genital
component instincts but the sadistic and anal ones. The con­
trast between ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ plays no part here as
yet. Its place is taken by the contrast between ‘active’ and
‘passive’, which may be described as a precursor of the sexual
polarity and which later on is soldered to that polarity. What
appears to us as masculine in the activities of this phase, when
we look at it from the point of view of the genital phase, turns
out to be an expression of an instinct for mastery which easily
passes over into cruelty. Trends with a passive aim are attached
to the erotogenic zone of the anal orifice, which is very impor­
tant at this period. The instincts for looking and for gaining
knowledge [the scopophilic and epistemophilic instincts] are
powerfully at work; the genitals actually play a part in sexual
life only as organs for the excretion of urine. The component
instincts of this phase are not without objects, but those objects
do not necessarily converge into a single object. The sadisticanal organization is the immediate forerunner of the phase of
genital primacy. Detailed study shows how much of it is re­
tained in the later definitive shape of things and shows too the
way in which its component instincts are compelled to take their
place in the new genital organization.1 Behind the sadistic-anal
phase of libidinal development we get a glimpse of a still earlier
and more primitive stage of organization, in which the eroto­
genic zone of the mouth plays the chief part. As you will guess,
the sexual activity of sensual sucking [p. 313] belongs to it. We
must admire the understanding of the Ancient Egyptians who,
in their art, represented children, including the God Horus,
with a finger in their mouth. Only recently Abraham [1916]
has given examples of the traces which this primitive oral phase
leaves behind it in later sexual life.
I can well suppose, Gentlemen, that this last account of the
1 [Freud afterwards interposed a ‘phallic’ phase between the sadisticanal and genital organizations (Freud, 1923e).]

328

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

sexual organizations has obstructed rather than instructed you,
and it may be that I have once more entered too much into
details. But you must have patience. What you have just heard
will derive increased value for you from its later application.
For the present you should keep firmly in mind that sexual life
(or, as we put it, the libidinal function) does not emerge as
something ready-made and does not even develop further in its
own likeness, but passes through a series of successive phases
which do not resemble one another; its development is thus
several times repeated—like that of a caterpillar into a butter­
fly. The turning-point of this development is the subordination
of all the component sexual instincts under the primacy of the
genitals and along with this the subjection of sexuality to the
reproductive function. This is preceded by a sexual life that
might be described as distracted—the independent activity of
the different component instincts striving for organ-pleasure.
This anarchy is mitigated by abortive beginnings of‘pregenital’
organizations—a sadistic-anal phase preceded by an oral one,
which is perhaps the most primitive. In addition, there are the
various, still incompletely known, processes which lead one
stage of organization over to the subsequent and next higher
one. We shall learn later1 what an important light is thrown on
the neuroses by the fact that the libido passes through such a
long course of development and one which has so many breaks
in it.
To-day we will follow yet another side of this development—
namely the relation of the component sexual instincts to their
object. Or rather, we will make a hasty survey of this develop­
ment and dwell somewhat longer on one of its rather late con­
sequences. A few of the components of the sexual instinct, then,
have an object from the first and hold fast to it—for instance, the
instinct for mastery (sadism) and the scopophilic and epistemophilic instincts. Others, more definitely linked to particular
erotogenic zones of the body, have one to begin with only, so
long as they are still attached to the non-sexual functions
[cf. p. 313 above], and give it up when they become separated
from them. Thus the first object of the oral component of the
sexual instinct is the mother’s breast which satisfies the infant’s
1 [Actually in the next lecture.]

I

XXI. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIDO

329

need for nourishment. The erotic component, which is satisfied
simultaneously during the [nutritive] sucking, makes itself in­
dependent with the act of sensual sucking \lutscheri\; it gives up
the outside object and replaces it by an area of the subject’s own
body. The oral instinct becomes auto-erotic, as are the anal and
other erotogenic instincts from the first. Further development,
to put the matter as concisely as possible, has two aims: firstly,
the abandonment of auto-erotism, the replacement of the sub­
ject’s own body once more by an outside object, and secondly,
the unification of the various objects of the separate instincts
and their replacement by a single object. This can, of course,
only be achieved if the object is again a whole body, similar to
the subject’s own. Nor can it be effected unless a number of
the auto-erotic instinctual impulses are left behind as being
unserviceable.
The processes of finding an object are fairly complex and no
comprehensive account has hitherto been given of them. For
our purposes it may be specially pointed out that when, in the
years of childhood before puberty, the process has in some re­
spects reached a conclusion, the object that has been found
turns out to be almost identical with the first object of the oral
pleasure-instinct, which was reached by attachment [to the
nutritional instinct].1 Though it is not actually the mother’s
breast, at least it is the mother. We call the mother the first love­
object. For we speak of love when we bring the mental side of
the sexual trends into the foreground and want to force back
the underlying physical or ‘sensual’ instinctual demands or to
forget them for a moment. At the time at which the child’s
mother becomes his love-object the psychical work of repression
has already begun in him, which is withdrawing from his know­
ledge awareness of a part of his sexual aims. To his choice of
his mother as a love-object everything becomes attached which,
under the name of the ‘Oedipus complex’, has attained so much
importance in the psycho-analytic explanation of the neuroses
and has played no less a part, perhaps, in the resistance to
psycho-analysis. [Cf. p. 207 above.]1
2
1 [This is further explained in Lecture XXVI, p. 426 below.]
2 [Freud’s first published account of the Oedipus complex was given
in The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), Standard Ed., 4, 261-6, though he
had put it forward earlier in a letter to Fliess of October 15, 1897

330

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

Listen to this episode which occurred in the course of the
present war. One of the stout disciples of psycho-analysis was
stationed as medical officer on the German front somewhere in
Poland. He attracted his colleagues’ attention by the fact that
he occasionally exercised an unexpected influence on a patient.
When he was questioned, he acknowledged that he was employ­
ing the methods of psycho-analysis and declared his readiness to
convey his knowledge to his colleagues. Every evening there­
after the medical officers of the corps, his colleagues and his
superiors, came together in order to learn the secret doctrines
of analysis. All went well for a while; but when he spoke to his
audience about the Oedipus complex, one of his superiors rose,
declared he did not believe it, that it was a vile act on the part
of the lecturer to speak of such things to them, honest men who
were fighting for their country and fathers of a family, and that
he forbade the continuance of the lectures. That was the end of
the matter. The analyst got himself transferred to another part
of the front. It seems to me a bad thing, however, if a German
victory requires that science shall be ‘organized’ in this way,
and German science will not respond well to organization of
such a kind.

And now you will be eager to hear what this terrible Oedipus
complex contains. Its name tells you. You all know the Greek
legend of King Oedipus, who was destined by fate to kill his
father and take his mother to wife, who did everything possible
to escape the oracle’s decree and punished himself by blinding
when he learned that he had none the less unwittingly com­
mitted both these crimes. I hope many of you may yourselves
have felt the shattering effect of the tragedy in which Sophocles
has treated the story. The work of the Athenian dramatist ex­
hibits the way in which the long-past deed of Oedipus is gradu­
ally brought to light by an investigation ingeniously protracted
and fanned into life by ever fresh relays of evidence. To this
extent it has a certain resemblance to the progress of a psycho­
analysis. In the course of the dialogue Jocasta, the deluded
mother and wife, declares herself opposed to the continuance of
(Freud, 1950a, Letter 71). The actual term ‘Oedipus complex’ was first
introduced much later, in a paper on a special type of object-choice
(1910A), Standard Ed., 11, 171.]

XXI. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIDO

331

the enquiry. She appeals to the fact that many people have
dreamt of lying with their mothers, but that dreams should be
despised. We do not despise dreams—least of all, typical dreams
which occur to many people; and we do not doubt that the
dream referred to by Jocasta has an intimate connection with
the strange and terrifying content of the legend.
It is a surprising thing that the tragedy of Sophocles does not
call up indignant repudiation in his audience—a reaction
similar to that of our simple-minded army doctor but far better
justified. For fundamentally it is an amoral work: it absolves
men from moral responsibility, exhibits the gods as promoters
of crime and shows the impotence of the moral impulses of men
which struggle against crime. It might easily be supposed that
the material of the legend had in view an indictment of the gods
and of fate; and in the hands of Euripides, the critic and enemy
of the gods, it would probably have become such an indictment.
But with the devout Sophocles there is no question of an
application of that kind. The difficulty is overcome by the pious
sophistry that to bow to the will of the gods is the highest
morality even when it promotes crime. I cannot think that this
morality is a strong point of the play, but it has no influence on
its effect. It is not to it that the auditor reacts but to the secret
sense and content of the legend. He reacts as though by self­
analysis he had recognized the Oedipus complex in himself and
had unveiled the will of the gods and the oracle as exalted dis­
guises of his own unconscious. It is as though he was obliged
to remember the two wishes—to do away with his father and
in place of him to take his mother to wife—and to be horrified
at them. And he understands the dramatist’s voice as though it
were saying to him: ‘You are struggling in vain against your
responsibility and are protesting in vain of what you have done
in opposition to these criminal intentions. You are guilty, for you
have not been able to destroy them; they still persist in you un­
consciously.’ And there is psychological truth contained in this.
Even if a man has repressed his evil impulses into the uncon­
scious and would like to tell himself afterwards that he is not re­
sponsible for them, he is nevertheless bound to be aware of this
responsibility as a sense of guilt whose basis is unknown to him.1
There can be no doubt that the Oedipus complex may be
1 [Cf. a paragraph near the end of Lecture XIII, p. 211 above.]
s.f. xvt—Y

332

,

'
>

'
i
!

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

looked upon as one of the most important sources of the sense
of guilt by which neurotics are so often tormented. But more
than this: in a study of the beginnings of human religion and
morality which I published in 1913 under the title of Totem and
Taboo [Freud, 1912-13] I put forward a suggestion that man­
kind as a whole may have acquired its sense of guilt, the ulti­
mate source of religion and morality, at the beginning of its
history, in connection with the Oedipus complex. I should be
very glad to tell you more about this, but I had better leave it
on one side. Once one has begun on that topic it is hard to
break off; and we must go back to individual psychology.

[
।
i1
■1
1
,
■

What, then, can be gathered about the Oedipus complex
from the direct observation of children at the time of their
making their choice of an object before the latency period?
Well, it is easy to see that the little man wants to have his
mother all to himself, that he feels the presence of his father as
a nuisance, that he is resentful if his father indulges in any signs
of affection towards his mother and that he shows satisfaction
when his father has gone on a journey or is absent. He will
often express his feelings directly in words and promise his
mother to marry her. It will be thought that this amounts to
little compared to the deeds of Oedipus; but in fact it is enough,
it is the same thing at root. Observation is often obscured by
the circumstance that on other occasions the same child will
simultaneously give evidence of great affection for his father.
But contrary—or, as it is better to say, ‘ambivalent’1—emotional attitudes, which in adults would lead to a conflict, remain compatible with each other for a long time in children,
just as later they find a permanent place beside each other in
the unconscious. It will also be objected that the little boy’s
conduct arises from egoistic motives and gives no grounds for
postulating an erotic complex: the child’s mother attends to all
his needs, so that he has an interest in preventing her from looking after anyone else. This also is true; but it will soon become
clear that in this situation as in similar ones the egoistic interest2 is merely affording a point of support to which the erotic

।
‘'
'

1 [See below, p. 427 f.]
1 [This term recurs many times in Lecture XXVI, where some
editorial comment is made on it (p. 414).]

j

|
.
i■

।
’I
[
i
[

I

XXI. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIDO

'
.

,
।
I
(
<

,

\

.

t

1

■
1
■
|
।

l

i
I1.

333

trend is attached. The little boy may show the most undis­
guised sexual curiosity about his mother, he may insist upon
sleeping beside her at night, he may force his presence on her
while she is dressing or may even make actual attempts at
seducing her, as his mother will often notice and report with
amusement—all of which puts beyond doubt the erotic nature
of his tie with his mother. Nor must it be forgotten that the
mother devotes the same attention to a little daughter without
producing the same result1 and that the father often competes
with her in looking after the boy and yet fails to gain the same
significance as she does. In short, the factor of sexual preference
cannot be eliminated from the situation by any criticism. From
the standpoint of egoistic interest it would be simply foolish of
the little man not to prefer to put up with having two people
in his service rather than only one of them.
As you see, I have only described the relation of a boy to his
father and mother. Things happen in just the same way with
little girls, with the necessary changes:2 an affectionate attach­
ment to her father, a need to get rid of her mother as super­
fluous and to take her place, a coquetry which already employs
the methods of later womanhood—these offer a charming pic­
ture, especially in small girls, which makes us forget the possibly
grave consequences lying behind this infantile situation. We
must not omit to add that the parents themselves often exercise
a determining influence on the awakening of a child’s Oedipus
attitude by themselves obeying the pull of sexual attraction, and
that where there are several children the father will give the
plainest evidence of his greater affection for his little daughter
and the mother for her son. But the spontaneous nature of the
Oedipus complex in children cannot be seriously shaken even
by this factor.
When other children appear on the scene the Oedipus complex is enlarged into a family complex. This, with fresh support
1 [See, however, the next footnote.]
2 [It was not till many years later that Freud became fully aware of
the lack of symmetry in the Oedipus relations of the two sexes. This
emerged in his paper on ‘Some Psychical Consequences of the Anatomical Distinction between the Sexes’ (1925/) and was elaborated in the
later one on ‘Female Sexuality’ (19314). He discussed the question again
in Lecture XXXIII of the New Introductory Lectures (1933a) and lastly in
Chapter VII of his posthumous Outline ofPsycho-Analysis (1940a [1938]).]

334

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

from the egoistic sense of injury, gives grounds for receiving the
new brothers or sisters with repugnance and for unhesitatingly
getting rid of them by a wish. It is even true that as a rule
children are far readier to give verbal expression to these feelings
of hate than to those arising from the parental complex. If a
wish of this kind is fulfilled and the undesired addition to the
family is removed again shortly afterwards by death, we can
discover from a later analysis what an important experience
this death has been to the child, even though it need not have
remained fixed in his memory. A child who has been put into
second place by the birth of a brother or sister, and who is now
for the first time almost isolated from his mother, does not easily
forgive her this loss of place; feelings which in an adult would
be described as greatly embittered arise in him and are often
the basis of a permanent estrangement. We have already men­
tioned [p. 318] that the child’s sexual researches, with all their
consequences, usually follow from this vital experience of his.
As these brothers and sisters grow up, the boy’s attitude to them
undergoes very significant transformations. He may take his
sister as a love-object by way of substitute for his faithless
mother. Where there are several brothers, all of them courting
a younger sister, situations of hostile rivalry, which are so im­
portant for later life, arise already in the nursery. A little girl
may find in her elder brother a substitute for her father who
no longer takes an affectionate interest in her as he did in her
earliest years. Or she may take a younger sister as a substitute
for the baby she has vainly wished for from her father.
This and very much else of a similar nature will be shown to
you by the direct observation of children and by the considera­
tion of clearly retained memories from childhood uninfluenced
by analysis. From this you will conclude among other things
that the position of a child in the family order is a factor of
extreme importance in determining the shape of his later life
and should deserve consideration in every life-history. But, what
is more important, in view of this information which can be so
easily obtained, you will not be able to recall without a smile the
pronouncements of science in explanation of the prohibition of
incest. [Cf. p. 210 above.] There is no end to what has been
invented on the subject. It has been said that sexual inclination
is diverted from members of the same family who are of the

XXI. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIDO

335

opposite sex by the fact of having lived together from child­
hood; or, again, that a biological purpose of avoiding inbreeding is represented psychically by an innate horror of incest. In
all this the fact is entirely overlooked that such an inexorable
prohibition of it in law and custom would not be needed if there
were any reliable natural barriers against the temptation to in­
cest. The truth is just the opposite. A human being’s first choice
of an object is regularly an incestuous one, aimed, in the case
of the male, at his mother and sister; and it calls for the severest
prohibitions to deter this persistent infantile tendency from
realization. Among the primitive races still living to-day,
among savages, the prohibitions against incest are even very
much stricter than among ourselves, and Theodor Reik has only
recently shown in a brilliant work [Reik, 1915-16] that the
puberty rites of savages, which represent a re-birth, have the
sense of releasing the boy from his incestuous bond with his
mother and of reconciling him with his father.
Mythology will teach you that incest, which is supposed to be so
much detested by humans, is unhesitatingly allowed to the gods.
And you may learn from ancient history that incestuous sister­
marriage was a sanctified injunction upon the person of the Ruler
(among the Egyptian Pharaohs and the Incas of Peru). Whatwas
in question was thus a privilege forbidden to the common herd.
Mother-incest was one of the crimes of Oedipus, parricide
was the other. It may be remarked in passing that they are
also the two great crimes proscribed by totemism, the first
socio-religious institution of mankind.1

But let us now turn from the direct observation of children to
the analytic examination of adults who have become neurotic.
What help does analysis give towards a further knowledge of
the Oedipus complex? That can be answered in a word. Analysis
confirms all that the legend describes. It shows that each of
these neurotics has himself been an Oedipus or, what comes to
the same thing, has, as a reaction to the complex, become a
Hamlet.2 The analytic account of the Oedipus complex is, of
1 [Cf. Freud’s Totem and Taboo (1912-13).]
2 [Freud’s earliest published commentary on Hamlet (as well as on
Oedipas Rex) appeared in The Interpretation <jf Dreams (1900a), Standard
Ed., 4, 261-6.]

J
i
।

<
1

J
I

(

i'
;

j
j
|
‘

1
।
!

,
[
I
r
;

i

1

!
[

336

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

course, a magnification and coarsening of the infantile sketch.
The hatred of the father, the death-wishes against him, are no
longer hinted at timidly, the affection for the mother admits
that its aim is to possess her as a woman. Should we really
attribute such blatant and extreme emotional impulses to the
tender years of childhood, or is analysis deceiving us by an
admixture of some new factor? It is not hard to find one.
Whenever someone gives an account of a past event, even if he
is a historian, we must take into account what he unintention­
ally puts back into the past from the present or from some intermediate time, thus falsifying his picture of it. In the case of a
neurotic it is even a question whether this putting back is an
entirely unintentional one; later on we shall have to discover
reasons for this and have to do justice in general to the fact of
‘retrospective phantasying’.1 We can easily see, too, that hatred
of the father is reinforced by a number of factors arising from
later times and circumstances and that the sexual desires to­
wards the mother are cast into forms which must have been
alien as yet to a child. But it would be a vain effort to seek to
explain the whole Oedipus complex by retrospective phantasying and to attach it to later times. Its infantile core and more
or less of its accessories remain as they were confirmed by the
direct observation of children.
The clinical fact which meets us behind the form of the
Oedipus complex as it is established by analysis is of the highest
practical significance. We learn that at puberty, when the
sexual instinct first makes its demands in full strength, the old
familiar incestuous objects are taken up again and freshly
cathected2 with libido. The infantile object-choice was only a
feeble one, but it was a prelude, pointing the direction for the
object-choice at puberty. At this point, then, very intense
emotional processes come into play, following the direction of
the Oedipus complex or reacting against it, processes which,
however, since their premisses have become intolerable, must
1 [See the later part of Lecture XXIII.]
1 [‘Besetzt’, charged with energy. The concept of ‘Besetzungen
(cathexes)’, charges of psychical energy, is fundamental to Freud’s
theories. A discussion of it will be found in an Editor’s Appendix to an
early paper of Freud’s (1894a), Standard Ed., 3,63 f. The term reappears
frequently below.]

'
'

■

*

r
,

XXI. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIDO

337

to a large extent remain apart from consciousness. From this
time onwards, the human individual has to devote himself to
the great task of detaching himself from his parents, and not
until that task is achieved can he cease to be a child and be­
come a member of the social community. For the son this task
consists in detaching his libidinal wishes from his mother and
employing them for the choice of a real outside love-object, and
in reconciling himself with his father if he has remained in
opposition to him, or in freeing himself from his pressure if, as
a reaction to his infantile rebelliousness, he has become sub­
servient to him. These tasks are set to everyone; and it is re­
markable how seldom they are dealt with in an ideal manner
—that is, in one which is correct both psychologically and
socially. By neurotics, however, no solution at all is arrived at:
the son remains all his life bowed beneath his father’s authority
and he is unable to transfer his libido to an outside sexual
object. With the relationship’changed round, the same fate can
await the daughter. In this sense the Oedipus complex may
justly be regarded as the nucleus of the neuroses.1
As you may imagine, Gentlemen, I have passed very cur­
sorily over a great number of considerations of both practical
and theoretical importance connected with the Oedipus com­
plex. Nor shall I enter into its variations or its possible reversal.8
Among its remoter connections I will only give you a further
hint that it has turned out to have a highly important effect
on literary production. In a valuable work Otto Rank [ 1912b]
has shown that dramatists of every period have chosen their
material in the main from the Oedipus and incest complex and
its variations and disguises. Nor should it be allowed to pass
unnoticed that the two criminal wishes of the Oedipus complex
were recognized as the true representatives of the uninhibited
life of the instincts long before the time of psycho-analysis.
Among the writings of the Encyclopaedist Diderot you will find
a celebrated dialogue, Le neveu de Rameau, which was rendered
1 [Freud had been using this phrase frequently for several years
previously. It appears already in a footnote to his ‘Rat Man’ case
history (1909d), Standard Ed., 10, 208 n.]
2
[This last point is most fully dealt with in Chapter III of The Ego
and the Id (19236), Standard Ed., 19, 31 ff.]

338

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

into German by no less a person than Goethe. There you may
read this remarkable sentence: ‘Si le petit sauvage etait abandonne a lui-meme, qu’il conservat toute son imbecillite, et qu’il
reunit au peu de raison de 1’enfant au berceau la violence des
passions de 1’homme de trente ans, il tordrait le col 1 son pdre
et coucherait avec sa mere.’1
But there is something else that I cannot pass by. The re­
minder of dreams given to us by the mother and wife of Oedipus
must not be allowed to remain fruitless. Do you recall the out­
come of our dream-analyses—how the wishes that construct
dreams are so often of a perverse or incestuous nature or reveal
an unsuspected hostility to those who are nearest and dearest
to the dreamer? At that time [p. 142] we gave no explanation
of the origin of these evil impulses. Now you can find it for
yourselves. They are allocations of the libido and objectcathexes2 which date from early infancy and have long since
been abandoned as far as conscious life is concerned, but which
prove still to be present at night-time and to be capable of func­
tioning in a certain sense. Since, however, everyone, and not
only neurotics, experiences these perverse, incestuous and mur­
derous dreams, we may conclude that people who are normal
to-day have passed along a path of development that has led
through the perversions and object-cathexes of the Oedipus
complex, that that is the path of normal development and that
neurotics merely exhibit to us in a magnified and coarsened
form what the analysis of dreams reveals to us in healthy people
as well. And this is one of the reasons why I dealt with the study
of dreams before that of neurotic symptoms.
1 [‘If the little savage were left to himself, preserving all his foolish­
ness and adding to the small sense of a child in the cradle the violent
passions of a man of thirty, he would strangle his father and lie with his
mother.’ Freud quoted this passage again (in Goethe’s German version)
in his note on ‘The Expert Opinion in the Halsmann Case’ (193 Id) and
again (in French) at the end of Part II of his posthumous Outline of
Pycho-Analysis (1940a [1938]).]
8 [I.e. charges of psychical energy concentrated upon objects. See
footnote 2, p. 336 above.]

I

LECTURE XXII

SOME THOUGHTS ON DEVELOPMENT
AND REGRESSION—AETIOLOGY
Ladies and Gentlemen,—You have heard that the libidinal
function goes through a lengthy development before it can, in
what is described as the normal manner, be enlisted in the
service of reproduction. I should now like to bring to your
attention the significance of this fact in the causation of the
neuroses.
We are, I think, in agreement with the theories of general
pathology in assuming that a development of this kind involves
two dangers—first, of inhibition, and secondly, of regression. That
is to say, in view of the general tendency of biological processes
to variation, it is bound to be the case that not every preparatory
phase will be passed through with equal success and completely
superseded: portions of the function will be permanently held
back at these early stages, and the total picture of development
will be qualified by some amount of developmental inhibition.
Let us look for some analogies to these processes in other
fields of knowledge. When, as often happened at early periods
of human history, a whole people left their place of domicile
and sought a new one, we may be certain that the whole of
them did not arrive at the new location. Apart from other losses,
it must regularly have happened that small groups or bands
of the migrants halted on the way and settled at these stopping­
places while the main body went further. Or, as you know, to
turn to a nearer comparison, in the highest mammals the male
sex-glands, which are originally situated deep in the abdominal
cavity, start upon a migration at a particular stage of intra­
uterine life, which brings them almost directly under the skin
of the pelvic extremity. As a consequence of this migration,
we find in a number of male individuals that one of these paired
organs has remained behind in the pelvic cavity, or that it has
become permanently lodged in what is known as the inguinal
canal, through which both organs must pass in the course of
their migration, or at least that this canal has remained open,
339

340

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

though it should normally close up after the sex-glands have
completed their change of situation. Or again, when as a young
student I was engaged under von Brticke’s direction on my first
piece of scientific work, I was concerned with the origin of the
posterior nerve-roots in the spinal cord of a small fish of very
archaic structure;1 I found that the nerve-fibres of these roots
have their origin in large cells in the posterior horn of the grey
matter, which is no longer the case in other vertebrates. But I
also discovered soon afterwards that nerve-cells of this kind are
present outside the grey matter the whole way to what is known
as the spinal ganglion of the posterior root; and from this I
inferred that the cells of these masses of ganglia had migrated
from the spinal cord along the roots of the nerves. This is also
shown by their evolutionary history. But in this small fish the
whole path of their migration was demonstrated by the cells
that had remained behind.1
2
If you go into the matter more closely, you will have no
difficulty in detecting the weak points in these comparisons. I
will therefore declare without more ado that I regard it as
possible in the case of every particular sexual trend that some
portions of it have stayed behind at earlier stages of its develop­
ment, even though other portions may have reached their final
goal. You will recognize here that we are picturing every such
trend as a current which has been continuous since the begin­
ning of life but which we have divided up, to some extent
artificially, into separate successive advances. Your impression
that these ideas stand in need of greater clarification is justified;
but to attempt it would take us too far afield. Let me further
make it clear that we propose to describe the lagging behind
of a part trend at an earlier stage as a fixation—a fixation, that
is, of the instinct.
The second danger in a development by stages of this sort
lies in the fact that the portions which have proceeded further
may also easily return retrogressively to one of these earlier
stages—what we describe as a regression. The trend will find itself
led into a regression of this kind if the exercise of its function—
1 [The larval form of the brook lamprey.]
2 [This is a summary of the findings of two of Freud’s very first papers
(1877a and 1878a). His own earlier abstracts of them (1897Z>, Nos. II
and III) will be found in Standard Ed., 3, 228-9.]

XXII. DEVELOPMENT AND REGRESSION

341

that is, the attainment of its aim of satisfaction—is met, in its
later or more highly developed form, by powerful external
obstacles. It is plausible to suppose that fixation and regression
are not independent of each other. The stronger the fixations
on its path of development, the more readily will the function
evade external difficulties by regressing to the fixations—the
more incapable, therefore, does the developed function turn out
to be of resisting external obstacles in its course. Consider that,
if a people which is in movement has left strong detachments
behind at the stopping-places on its migration, it is likely that
the more advanced parties will be inclined to retreat to these
stopping-places if they have been defeated or have come up
against a superior enemy. But they will also be in the greater
danger of being defeated the more of their number they have
left behind on their migration.
It is important for your understanding of the neuroses that
you should not leave this relation between fixation and regres­
sion out of sight. This will give you a firmer footing in facing
the question of how the neuroses are caused—the question of
the aetiology of the neuroses which we shall shortly have to
meet.
For the moment we will dwell a little longer on regression.
After what you have learnt of the development of the libidinal
function, you will be prepared to hear that there are regressions
of two sorts: a return to the objects first cathected by the libido,
which, as we know, are of an incestuous nature, and a return
of the sexual organization as a whole to earlier stages. Both
sorts are found in the transference neuroses [p. 299] and play
a great part in their mechanism. In particular, a return to the
first incestuous objects of the libido is a feature that is found in
neurotics with positively fatiguing regularity. There is much
more to be said about regressions of the libido itself when we
take into account as well another group of neuroses, the
narcissistic ones, which for the time being we do not intend
to do.1 These disorders give us access to other developmental
processes of the libidinal function which we have not yet men­
tioned, and show us correspondingly new sorts of regression as
well. But above all I think I ought to warn you now not to
confuse regression with repression and help you to form a clear idea
1 [They are discussed in Lecture XXVI.]

i
[

।
I

j

i
1
;
;

.

342

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

of the relations between the two processes.1 Repression, as you
will recall [p. 294 ff.], is the process by which an act which
is admissible to consciousness, one, therefore, which belongs to
the system Pcs., is made unconscious—is pushed back, there­
fore, into the system Ues.1
2 And we equally speak of repression
if the unconscious mental act is altogether forbidden access to
the neighbouring preconscious system and is turned back at
the threshold by the censorship. Thus the concept of repression
involves no relation to sexuality: I must ask you to take special
note of that. It indicates a purely psychological process, which
we can characterize still better if we call it a ‘topographical’
one. By this we intend to say that it is concerned with the
psychical regions which we have assumed to exist, or, if we
drop this clumsy working hypothesis, with the construction of
the mental apparatus out of distinct psychical systems.
The comparison we have proposed has drawn our attention
for the first time to the fact that we have not hitherto been
using the word ‘regression’ in its general sense but in a quite
special one. If we give it its general sense—of a return from a
higher to a lower stage of development—then repression too can
be subsumed under the concept of regression, for it too can
be described as a return to an earlier and deeper stage in the
development of a psychical act. In the case of repression, how­
ever, this retrogressive movement does not concern us, since we
also speak of repression, in the dynamic sense, when a psychical
act is held back at the lower, unconscious, stage. The fact is
that repression is a topographico-dynamic concept, while re­
gression is a purely descriptive one. What we have hitherto
spoken of as regression, however, and have related to fixation,
has meant exclusively a return of the libido to earlier stopping­
places in its development—something, that is, entirely different
in its nature from repression and entirely independent of it.
Nor can we call regression of the libido a purely psychical
process and we cannot tell where we should localize it in the
1 [The extremely close resemblance of the two words to each other
is an added misfortune peculiar to English. In German no such similarity
exists between ‘Regression’ and ‘ Verdrangung’
2 [‘Per.’ and ‘Ues’ are the abbreviations (first introduced by Freud
in the seventh chapter of The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), 5, 540 ff.)
for the preconscious and unconscious mental systems.]

XXII. DEVELOPMENT AND REGRESSION

343

mental apparatus. And though it is true that it exercises the
most powerful influence on mental life, yet the most prominent
factor in it is the organic one.
Discussions like this, Gentlemen, are bound to become some­
what arid. So let us turn to clinical material in order to find
applications of it that will be a little more impressive. Hysteria
and obsessional neurosis are, as you know, the two chief repre­
sentatives of the group of transference neuroses. Now it is true
that in hysteria there is a regression of the libido to the primary
incestuous sexual objects and that this occurs quite regularly;
but there is as good as no regression to an earlier stage of the
sexual organization. To offset this, the chief part in the mech­
anism of hysteria is played by repression. If I might venture to
complete what we already know for certain about this neurosis
by making a construction, I might explain the position thus.
The unification of the component instincts under the primacy
of the genitals has been accomplished; but its results come up
against the resistance of the preconscious system which is linked
with consciousness. Thus the genital organization holds good
for the unconscious, but not in the same way for the pre­
conscious; and this rejection on the part of the preconscious
brings about a picture which has certain resemblances to the
state of things before genital primacy. But it is nevertheless
something quite different.
Of the two kinds of regression of the libido, that to an earlier
phase of the sexual organization is by far the more striking.
Since this is absent in hysteria, and since our whole view of the
neuroses is still far too much under the influence of the study of
hysteria, which was chronologically the first, the significance of
libidinal regression also became clear to us far later than that of
repression. We must be prepared to find that our views will be
subjected to still further extensions and revaluations when we
are able to take into consideration not only hysteria and
obsessional neurosis but also the other, narcissistic neuroses.
In obsessional neurosis, on the contrary, it is the regression of
the libido to the preliminary stage of the sadistic-anal organiza­
tion that is the most striking fact and the one which is decisive
for what is manifested in symptoms. The love-impulse is
obliged, when this has happened, to disguise itself as a sadistic

344

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

impulse. The obsessional idea ‘I should like to kill you’, when
it has been freed from certain additions which are not a matter
of chance but are indispensable, means at bottom nothing other
than ‘I should like to enjoy you in love’. If you consider further
that there has been a simultaneous regression in regard to the
object, so that these impulses apply only to those who are
nearest and dearest to the patient, you can form some idea of
the horror which these obsessions arouse in him and at the
same time of the alien appearance which they present to his
conscious perception. But repression, too, plays a great part in
the mechanism of these neuroses, though in a cursory introduc­
tion like ours this is not easily demonstrated. A regression of the
libido without repression would never produce a neurosis but
would lead to a perversion. From this you can see that repres­
sion is the process which is most peculiar to neuroses and is most
characteristic of them. Perhaps I may have an opportunity later
of telling you what we know of the mechanism of the perver­
sions, and you will see that in their case too things are not so
simple as we should be glad to make them out.1
I think, Gentlemen, that you will best come to terms with
what you have just been told about fixation and regression of
the libido if you will regard it as a preparation for research into
the aetiology of the neuroses. Hitherto I have only given you
one piece of information about this: namely that people fall ill
of a neurosis if they are deprived of the possibility of satisfying
their libido—that they fall ill owing to ‘frustration’, as I put it
—and that their symptoms are precisely a substitute for their
frustrated satisfaction. [Cf. p. 300.] This is not supposed to
mean, of course, that every frustration of a libidinal satisfaction
makes the person it affects neurotic, but merely that the factor
of frustration could be discerned in every case of neurosis that
has been examined. Thus [as logicians would say] the proposi­
tion is not convertible. No doubt, too, you will have understood
that this assertion does not claim to reveal the whole secret of
the aetiology of neuroses but is only bringing into prominence
one important and indispensable determinant.
In further pursuing the discussion of this thesis, are we to
1 [This seems to be one of the points to which, as he remarks at the
end of these lectures (p. 463), he had no opportunity of returning.]

XXII. DEVELOPMENT AND REGRESSION

345

consider the nature of the frustration or the peculiar character
of those who are affected by it? It is extremely seldom, after all,
that frustration is universal and absolute. In order to operate
pathogenically it must no doubt affect the mode of satisfaction
which alone the subject desires, of which alone he is capable.
There are in general very many ways of tolerating deprivation
of libidinal satisfaction without falling ill as a result. In the first
place, we know people who are able to put up with a depriva­
tion of this kind without being injured: they are not happy,
they suffer from longing, but they do not fall ill. Next, we must
bear in mind that the sexual instinctual impulses in particular
are extraordinarily plastic, if I may so express it. One of them
can take the place of another, one of them can take over
another’s intensity ; if the satisfaction of one of them is frustrated
by reality, the satisfaction of another can afford complete com­
pensation. They are related to one another like a network of
intercommunicating channels filled with a liquid;1 and this is
so in spite of their being subject to the primacy of the genitals
—a state of affairs that is not at all easily combined in a single
picture. Further, the component instincts of sexuality, as well
as the sexual current which is compounded from them, exhibit
a large capacity for changing their object, for taking another in
its place—and one, therefore, that is more easily attainable.
This displaceability and readiness to accept a substitute must
operate powerfully against the pathogenic effect of a frustration.
Among these protective processes against falling ill owing to
deprivation there is one which has gained special cultural
significance. It consists in the sexual trend abandoning its aim
of obtaining a component or a reproductive pleasure and taking
on another which is related genetically to the abandoned one
but is itself no longer sexual and must be described as social.
We call this process ‘sublimation’, in accordance with the
general estimate that places social aims higher than the sexual
ones, which are at bottom self-interested. Sublimation is,
incidentally, only a special case of the way in which sexual
trends are attached to other, non-sexual ones [cf. p. 313]. We
shall have to discuss it again in another connection.2
You may now have an impression that deprivation has been
1 [Cf. footnote 1 above, p. 310.]
2 [See the end of the next lecture, p. 376.]

346

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

reduced to insignificance owing to all these methods of tolerating it. But no, it retains its pathogenic power. The counter­
measures are on the whole insufficient. There is a limit to the
amount of unsatisfied libido that human beings on the average
can put up with. The plasticity or free mobility of the libido is
by no means fully preserved in everyone, and sublimation is
never able to deal with more than a certain fraction of libido,
quite apart from the fact that many people are gifted with only
a small amount of capacity to sublimate. The most important
of these limitations is evidently that upon the mobility of the
libido, since it makes a person’s satisfaction depend on the
attainment of only a very small number of aims and objects.
You have only to recall that an imperfect development of the
libido leaves behind it very fertile and perhaps, too, very
numerous libidinal fixations to early phases of the organization
and of the finding of objects, which are for the most part incap­
able of real satisfaction, and you will recognize in libidinal
fixation the second powerful factor which combines with frustra.
-—
-- -

I
i
I
?
!
i
«

;
i
f

J

- ..

XXII. DEVELOPMENT AND REGRESSION

347

libido (and the other features of the sexual constitution) or by
the pressure of frustration? This dilemma seems to me no more
sensible on the whole than another that I might put to you:
does a baby come about through being begotten by its father
or conceived by its mother? Both determinants are equally in­
dispensable, as you will justly reply. In the matter of the
causation of the neuroses the relation, if not precisely the same,
is very similar. As regards their causation, instances of neurotic
illness fall into a series within which the two factors—sexual
constitution and experience, or, if you prefer it, fixation of the
libido and frustration—are represented in such a manner that
if there is more of the one there is less of the other. At one end
of the series are the extreme cases of which you could say with
conviction: these people, in consequence of the singular
development of their libido, would have fallen ill in any case,
whatever they had experienced and however carefully their
lives had been sheltered. At the other end there are the cases,
as to which, on the contrary, you would have had to judge that

1

348

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

The tenacity with which the libido adheres to particular
trends and objects—what may be described as the ‘adhesive­
ness’ of the libido—makes its appearance as an independent
factor, varying from individual to individual, whose determin­
ants are quite unknown to us, but whose significance for the
aetiology of the neuroses we shall certainly no longer under­
estimate.1 We should not, on the other hand, over-estimate the
intimacy of this connection. For a similar ‘adhesiveness’ of the
libido occurs (for unknown reasons) under numerous conditions
in normal people, and it is found as a determining factor in
people who are in one sense the contrary of neurotics—in per­
verts. It was known even before the days of psycho-analysis (cf.
Binet [1888]) that in the anamnesis of perverts a very early
impression of an abnormal instinctual trend or choice of object
was quite often found, to which the subject’s libido remained
attached all through his life. It is often impossible to say what
it is that enabled this impression to exercise such an intense
attraction on the libido. I will describe a case of this sort which
I myself observed.
The subject was a man who is to-day quite indifferent to the
genitals and other attractions of women, but who can be
plunged into irresistible sexual excitement only by a foot of
a particular form wearing a shoe. He can recall an event from
his sixth year which was decisive for the fixation of his libido.
He was sitting on a stool beside the governess who was to give
him lessons in English. The governess, who was an elderly,
dried-up, plain-looking spinster, with pale-blue eyes and a snub
nose, had something wrong with her foot that day, and on that
account kept it, wearing a velvet slipper, stretched out on a
cushion. Her leg itself was most decently concealed. A thin,
scraggy foot, like the one he had then seen belonging to his
governess, thereupon became (after a timid attempt at normal
sexual activity at puberty) his only sexual object; and the man
was irresistibly attracted if a foot of this kind was associated with
other features besides which recalled the type of the English
governess. This fixation of his libido, however, made him, not
1 [This factor, under various names, was discussed by Freud at least
as early as in the first edition of the Three Essays (1905d), Standard Ed.,
7, 242. A number of references are given in an Editor’s footnote to the
paper on a case of paranoia (1915/"), ibid., 14, 272.]

’

j
1

।
(

XXII. DEVELOPMENT AND REGRESSION

349

into a neurotic, but into a pervert—what we call a foot­
fetishist.1 You see, then, that although an excessive, and more­
over premature, fixation of the libido is indispensable for the
causation of neuroses, the area of its effects extends far beyond
the field of the neuroses. This determinant, too, is as little
decisive in itself as is the frustration which we have already
talked about.

Thus the problem of the causation of the neuroses seems to
grow more complicated. In fact, psycho-analytic investigation
makes us acquainted with a fresh factor, which is not taken into
account in our aetiological series and which we can recognize
easiest in cases in which what has hitherto been a healthy con­
dition is suddenly disturbed by an onset of neurotic illness. In
such people we regularly find indications of a contention
between wishful impulses or, as we are in the habit of saying,
a psychical conflict. One part of the personality champions
certain wishes while another part opposes them and fends them
off. Without such a conflict there is no neurosis. There would
not seem to be anything peculiar in this. Our mental life is, as
you know, perpetually agitated by conflicts which we have to
settle. No doubt, therefore, special conditions must be fulfilled
if such a conflict is to become pathogenic. We must ask what
these conditions are, between what mental powers these patho­
genic conflicts are played out, and what the relation is between
the conflict and the other causative factors.
I hope to be able to give you adequate replies to these ques­
tions, even though the replies may be reduced to schematic
dimensions. The conflict is conjured up by frustration, as a
result of which the libido, deprived of satisfaction, is driven to
look for other objects and paths. The necessary precondition
of the conflict is that these other paths and objects arouse dis­
pleasure in one part of the personality, so that a veto is imposed
which makes the new method of satisfaction impossible as it
stands. From this point the construction of symptoms pursues
1 [Two or three years earlier Freud had read a paper to the Vienna
Psycho-Analytical Society on a similar case—possibly, even, the same
one. The paper has not yet been published, but is summarized by Ernest
Jones in the second volume of his Freud biography (1955, 342-3). An
account of Freud’s many discussions of fetishism is given in the Editor’s
Note to the paper bearing that title (1927e), Standard Ed., 21, 149 ff.]

I

350

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

its course, which we shall follow later.1 The repudiated libidinal
trends nevertheless succeed in getting their way by certain
roundabout paths, though not, it is true, without taking the
objection into account by submitting to some distortions and
mitigations. The roundabout paths are those taken by the
construction of symptoms; the symptoms are the fresh or
substitute satisfaction which has become necessary owing to the
fact of frustration.
The meaning of psychical conflict can be adequately ex­
pressed in another way by saying that for an external frustration
to become pathogenic an internal frustration must be added to it.
In that case, of course, the external and internal frustration
relate to different paths and objects. The external frustration
removes one possibility of satisfaction and the internal frustra­
tion seeks to exclude another possibility, about which the conflict
then breaks out. I prefer this way of representing the matter
because it has a secret content. For it hints at the probability
that the internal impediments arose from real external obstacles
during the prehistoric periods of human development.2
But what are the powers from which the objection to the
libidinal trend arises? What is the other party to the pathogenic
conflict? These powers, to put it quite generally, are the nonsexual instinctual forces. We class them together as the ‘ego­
instincts’.8 The psycho-analysis of the transference-neuroses
gives us no easy access to a further dissecting of them; at most
we come to know them to some extent by the resistances which
oppose analysis. The pathogenic conflict is thus one between
the ego-instincts and the sexual instincts. In a whole number of
cases, it looks as though there might also be a conflict between
different purely sexual trends. But in essence that is the same
thing; for, of the two sexual trends that are in conflict, one is
always, as we might say, ‘ego-syntonic’,4 while the other pro­
vokes the ego’s defence. It therefore still remains a conflict
between the ego and sexuality.
1 [In the following lecture.]
2 [Cf. p. 371 below. The whole question of frustration as a cause of
neurosis was discussed by Freud in a paper on ‘Types of Onset of
Neurosis’ (1912c).]
8 [An account of Freud’s use of this term is given in the Editor’s Note
to ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’ (1915c), Standard Ed., 14, 114 ff.]
4 ['Ichgerecht', i.e. in consonance with the ego.]

XXII. DEVELOPMENT AND REGRESSION

351

Over and over again, Gentlemen, when psycho-analysis has
claimed that some mental event is the product of the sexual
instincts, it has been angrily pointed out to it by way of defence
that human beings do not consist only of sexuality, that there
are instincts and interests in mental life other than sexual ones,
that it ought not to derive ‘everything’ from sexuality, and so
on. Well, it is most gratifying for once in a way to find ourselves
in agreement with our opponents. Psycho-analysis has never
forgotten that there are instinctual forces as well which are not
sexual. It was based on a sharp distinction between the sexual
instincts and the ego-instincts, and, in spite of all objections, it
has maintained not that the neuroses are derived from sexuality
but that their origin is due to a conflict between the ego and
sexuality. Nor has it any conceivable reason for disputing the
existence or significance of the ego-instincts while it pursues the
part played by the sexual instincts in illness and in ordinary life.
It has simply been its fate to begin by concerning itself with the
sexual instincts because the transference neuroses made them
the most easily accessible to examination and because it was
incumbent on it to study what other people had neglected.
Nor is it a fact that psycho-analysis has paid no attention
whatever to the non-sexual part of the personality. It is pre­
cisely the distinction between the ego and sexuality which has
enabled us to recognize with special clarity that the ego­
instincts pass through an important process of development—
a development which is neither completely independent of the
libido nor without a counter-effect upon it. Nevertheless, we are
far less well acquainted with the development of the ego than
of the libido, since it is only the study of the narcissistic neuroses1
that promises to give us an insight into the structure of the ego.
We already have before us, however, a notable attempt by
Ferenczi [1913] to make a theoretical construction of the stages
of development of the ego, and there are at least two points
at which we have a solid basis for judging that development.
It is not our belief that a person’s libidinal interests are from the
first in opposition to his self-preservative interests; on the con­
trary, the ego endeavours at every stage to remain in harmony
with its sexual organization as it is at the time and to fit itself
into it. The succession of the different phases of libidinal
1 [Discussed in Lecture XXVI.]

352

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

development probably follows a prescribed programme. But
the possibility cannot be rejected that this course of events can
be influenced by the ego, and we may expect equally to find a
certain parallelism, a certain correspondence, between the
developmental phases of the ego and the libido; indeed a dis­
turbance of that correspondence might provide a pathogenic
factor. We are now faced by the important consideration of
how the ego behaves if its libido leaves a strong fixation behind
at some point in its (the libido’s) development. The ego may
accept this and consequently become to that extent perverse or,
what is the same thing, infantile. It may, however, adopt a noncompliant attitude to the libido’s setding down in this position,
in which case the ego experiences a repression where the libido
has experienced a fixation.
Thus we discover that the third factor in the aetiology of the
neuroses, the tendency to conflict, is as much dependent on the
development of the ego as on that of the libido. Our insight into
the causation of the neuroses is thus made more complete. First
there is the most general precondition—frustration; next,
fixation of the libido which forces it into particular directions;
and thirdly, the tendency to conflict, arising from the develop­
ment of the ego, which rejects these libidinal impulses. The
situation, then, is not so very confused and hard to penetrate
as it probably seemed to you during the course of my remarks.
It is true, however, that we shall find we have not yet finished
with it. There is something new to be added and something
already familiar to be further examined.

In order to demonstrate to you the influence which the
development of the ego has upon the construction of conflicts
and upon the causation of neuroses, I should like to put an
example before you—one which, it is true, is a complete
invention but which is nowhere divorced from probability. I
shall describe it (on the basis of the title of one of Nestroy’s
farces1) as Tn the Basement and on the First Floor’. The care­
taker of the house inhabits the basement and its landlord, a
1 [Johann Nestroy (1801-62), famous in Vienna for his comedies and
farces. The literal translation of Nestroy’s title would be ‘On the
Ground Floor and on the First Floor’: the difference in the social habits
of nineteenth-century Vienna and London calls for the alteration.]

XXII. DEVELOPMENT AND REGRESSION

353

wealthy and respectable gentleman, the first floor. Both have
children, and we may suppose that the landlord’s little daughter
is allowed to play, without any supervision, with the proletarian
girl. It might very easily happen, then, that the children’s
games would take on a ‘naughty’—that is to say, a sexual—
character, that they would play at ‘father and mother’, that
they would watch each other at their most private business
and excite each other’s genitals. The caretaker’s girl, though
only five or six years old, would have had an opportunity of
observing a good deal of adult sexuality, and she might well
play the part of seductress in all this. These experiences, even
if they were not continued over a long period, would be enough
to set certain sexual impulses to work in the two children; and,
after their games together had ceased, these impulses would for
several years afterwards find expression in masturbation. So
much for their experiences in common; the final outcome in
the two children will be very different. The caretaker’s daughter
will continue her masturbation, perhaps, till her menstrual
periods begin and she will then give it up with no difficulty.
A few years later she will find a lover and perhaps have a baby.
She will take up some occupation or other, possibly become a
popular figure on the stage and end up as an aristocrat. Her
career is more likely to be less brilliant, but in any case she will
go through her life undamaged by the early exercise of her
sexuality and free from neurosis. With the landlord’s little girl
things will be different. At an early stage and while she is still
a child she will get an idea that she has done something wrong;
after a short time, but perhaps only after a severe struggle,
she will give up her masturbatory satisfaction, but she will
nevertheless still have some sense of oppression about her. When
in her later girlhood she is in a position to learn something of
human sexual intercourse, she will turn away from it with
unexplained disgust and prefer to remain in ignorance. And
now she will probably be subject to a fresh emergence of an
irresistible pressure to masturbate of which she will not dare to
complain. During the years in which she should exercise a
feminine attraction upon some man, a neurosis breaks out in
her which cheats her of marriage and her hopes in life. If after
this an analysis succeeds in gaining an insight into her neurosis,
it will turn out that the well-brought-up, intelligent and

354 ' GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES
high-minded girl has completely repressed her sexual impulses,
but that these, unconscious to her, are still attached to her
petty experiences with her childhood friend.
The difference between the lives of these two, in spite of their
having had the same experience, rests on the fact that the ego
of one of them underwent a development with which the other
never met. Sexual activity seemed to the caretaker’s daughter
just as natural and harmless in later life as it had in childhood.
The landlord’s daughter came under the influence of education
and accepted its demands. From the suggestions offered to it,
her ego constructed ideals of feminine purity and abstinence
which are incompatible with sexual activity; her intellectual
education reduced her interest in the feminine part which she
was destined to play. Owing to this higher moral and intellec­
tual development of her ego she came into conflict with the
demands of her sexuality.

I will dwell for a little to-day on yet another point in ego­
development, partly because I have some remoter aims in view,
but also because what follows is precisely calculated to justify
the sharp separation between the ego-instincts and the sexual
instincts which we favour but which is not self-evident. In
forming our judgement of the two courses of development—
both of the ego and of the libido—we must lay emphasis on a
consideration which has not often hitherto been taken into
account. For both of them are at bottom heritages, abbreviated
recapitulations of the development which all mankind has
passed through from its primaeval days over long periods of
time. In the case of the development of the libido, this phylo­
genetic origin is, I venture to think, immediately obvious. Con­
sider how in one class of animals the genital apparatus is
brought into the closest relation to the mouth, while in another
it cannot be distinguished from the excretory apparatus, and
in yet others it is linked to the motor organs—all of which you
will find attractively set out in W. Bolsche’s valuable book
[1911-13]. Among animals one can find, so to speak in petrified
form, every species of perversion of the sexual organization.
In the case of human beings, however, this phylogenetic point
of view is partly veiled by the fact that what is at bottom
inherited is nevertheless freshly acquired in the development of

ji
I
I
XXII. DEVELOPMENT AND REGRESSION

355

the individual,1 probably because the same conditions which
originally necessitated its acquisition persist and continue to
operate upon each individual. I should like to add that origin­
ally the operation of these conditions was creative but that it is
now evocative. Besides this, there is no doubt that the prescribed
course of development can be disturbed and altered in each
individual by recent external influences. But we know the
power which forced a development of this kind upon humanity
and maintains its pressure in the same direction to-day. It is,
once again, frustration by reality, or, if we are to give it its
true, grand name, the pressure of vital needs—Necessity
(’Avdynrj [Ananke]). She has been a strict educator and has
made much out of us. The neurotics are among those of her
children to whom her strictness has brought evil results; but
that is a risk with all education. This appreciation of the
necessities of life need not, incidentally, weigh against the im­
portance of ‘internal developmental trends’, if such can be
shown to be present.
Now it is a very noteworthy fact that the sexual instincts and
the self-preservative instincts do not behave in the same way
towards real necessity.2 The self-preservative instincts, and
everything to do with them, are much easier to educate: they
learn early to comply with necessity and to arrange their
developments in accordance with the instructions of reality.
This is intelligible, since they could not obtain the objects they
need in any other way; and without those objects the individual
would inevitably perish. The sexual instincts are harder to
educate, for at first they have no need of an object. Since they
are attached like parasites, as it were, to the other bodily func­
tions, and find their satisfaction auto-erotically on the subject’s
own body, they are to begin with withdrawn from the educative
influence of real necessity, and they retain this characteristic
of being self-willed and inaccessible to influence (what we
1 [This is an echo of a couplet from Goethe’s Faust, which was a
favourite quotation of Freud’s. See, for instance, Totem and Taboo
(1912-13), Standard Ed., 13, 158, and the closing sentences of his un­
finished Outline of Psycho-Analysis (1940zz [1938]).]
8 [‘Peale Not’, i.e. the exigencies imposed by reality. For what follows,
cf. paragraph (3) of ‘Formulations on the Two Principles of Mental
Functioning’ (191 lb), Standard Ed., 12, 222.]

356

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

describe as being ‘unreasonable’) in most people in some respect
all through their lives. Moreover, as a rule the educability of
a youthful individual is at an end when his sexual needs arise
in their full strength. Educators are aware of this and act
accordingly; but the findings of psycho-analysis may perhaps
also induce them to shift the main impact of education on to
the earliest years of childhood, from infancy onwards. The little
creature is often completed by the fourth or fifth year of life,
and after that merely brings gradually to light what is already
within him.
In order to appreciate the full significance of the difference
which I have pointed out between the two groups of instincts,
we shall have to go back a long way and introduce one of those
considerations which deserve to be described as economic [p. 275
above]. This leads us to one of the most important, but
unluckily also one of the most obscure, regions of psycho­
analysis. We may ask whether in the operation of our mental
apparatus a main purpose can be detected, and we may reply
as a first approximation that that purpose is directed to obtain­
ing pleasure. It seems as though our total mental activity is
directed towards achieving pleasure and avoiding unpleasure
—that it is automatically regulated by the pleasure principle.1
We should of all things like to know, then, what determines the
generation of pleasure and unpleasure; but that is just what
we are ignorant of. We can only venture to say this much: that
pleasure is in some way connected with the diminution, reduction
or extinction of the amounts of stimulus prevailing in the
mental apparatus, and that similarly unpleasure is connected
with their increase. An examination of the most intense pleasure
which is accessible to human beings, the pleasure of accomplish­
ing the sexual act, leaves little doubt on this point. Since in such
processes related to pleasure it is a question of what happens to
quantities of mental excitation or energy, we call considerations
of this kind economic. It will be noticed that we can describe
the tasks and achievements of the mental apparatus in another
and more general way than by stressing the acquisition of
pleasure. We can say that the mental apparatus serves the
purpose of mastering and disposing of the amounts of stimulus
and sums of excitation that impinge on it from outside and
1 [See the next footnote.]

r

XXII. DEVELOPMENT AND REGRESSION

357

inside.1 It is immediately obvious that the sexual instincts, from
beginning to end of their development, work towards obtaining
pleasure; they retain their original function unaltered. The
other instincts, the ego-instincts, have the same aim to start
with. But under the influence of the instructress Necessity, they
soon learn to replace the pleasure principle by a modification
of it. For them the task of avoiding unpleasure turns out to be
almost as important as that of obtaining pleasure. The ego
discovers that it is inevitable for it to renounce immediate
satisfaction, to postpone the obtaining of pleasure, to put up
with a little unpleasure and to abandon certain sources of
pleasure altogether. An ego thus educated has become ‘reason­
able’; it no longer lets itself be governed by the pleasure
principle, but obeys the reality principle,2 which also at bottom
seeks to obtain pleasure, but pleasure which is assured through
taking account of reality, even though it is pleasure postponed
and diminished.
The transition from the pleasure principle to the reality
principle is one of the most important steps forward in the ego’s
development. We know already that it is only late and unwill­
ingly that the sexual instincts join in this piece of development,
and we shall hear later the consequences for human beings of
the fact that their sexuality is content with such a loose connec­
tion with external reality. And now in conclusion one last
remark on this subject. If man’s ego has its process of develop­
ment like the libido, you will not be surprised to hear that there
are also ‘regressions of the ego’, and you will be anxious to know
too what part may be played in neurotic illnesses by this return
of the ego to earlier phases of its development.3
1 [This is sometimes referred to as the ‘principle of constancy’. It,
and the related ‘pleasure principle’, are discussed in an Editor’s
Appendix to Freud’s first paper on the neuro-psychoses of defence
(1894a), Standard Ed., 3, 65. See also the footnote on p. 375 below.]
8 [The term appears first in ‘Formulations on the Two Principles of
Mental Functioning’ (191 li), Standard Ed., 12, 219, the Editor’s Note
to which traces the origin of the concept.]
s [Some account of the development of Freud’s views on regression
and of his various uses of the term will be found in an Editor’s note at
the end of Part I of the ‘Project’ of 1895 in Standard Ed., 1.]

LECTURE XXIII

THE PATHS TO THE FORMATION
OF SYMPTOMS
Ladies and Gentlemen,—For laymen the symptoms con­
stitute the essence of a disease and its cure consists in the re­
moval of the symptoms. Physicians attach importance to
distinguishing the symptoms from the disease and declare that
getting rid of the symptoms does not amount to curing the
disease. But the only tangible thing left of the disease after the
symptoms have been got rid of is the capacity to form new
symptoms. For that reason we will for the moment adopt the
layman’s position and assume that to unravel the symptoms
means the same thing as to understand the disease.
Symptoms—and of course we are dealing now with psy­
chical (or psychogenic) symptoms and psychical illness—are
acts detrimental, or at least useless, to the subject’s life as a
whole, often complained of by him as unwelcome and bringing
unpleasure or suffering to him. The main damage they do
resides in the mental expenditure which they themselves involve
and in the further expenditure that becomes necessary for
fighting against them. Where there is an extensive formation
of symptoms, these two sorts of expenditure can result in an
extraordinary impoverishment of the subject in regard to the
mental energy available to him and so in paralysing him for all
the important tasks of life. Since this outcome depends mainly
on the quantity of the energy which is thus absorbed, you will
easily see that ‘being ill’ is in its essence a practical concept.
But if you take up a theoretical point of view and disregard this
matter of quantity, you may quite well say that we are all ill—
that is, neurotic—since the preconditions for the formation
of symptoms can also be observed in normal people.

We already know that neurotic symptoms are the outcome of
a conflict which arises over a new method of satisfying the
libido [p. 349]. The two forces which have fallen out meet
once again in the symptom and are reconciled, as it were, by
358

r

XXIII. THE PATHS TO SYMPTOM-FORMATION 359

the compromise of the symptom that has been constructed. It
is for that reason, too, that the symptom is so resistant: it is
supported from both sides. We also know that one of the two
partners to the conflict is the unsatisfied libido which has been
repulsed by reality and must now seek for other paths to its
satisfaction. If reality remains relentless even though the libido
is ready to take another object in place of the one that has been
refused to it, then it will finally be compelled to take the path
of regression and strive to find satisfaction either in one of the
organizations which it has already outgrown or from one of the
objects which it has earlier abandoned. The libido is lured into
the path of regression by the fixation which it has left behind it
at these points in its development.
The path to perversion branches off sharply from that to
neurosis. If these regressions rouse no objection from the ego,
no neurosis will come about either; and the libido will arrive
at some real, even though no longer normal, satisfaction. But
if the ego, which has under its control not only consciousness
but also the approaches to motor innervation and accordingly
to the realization of mental desires, does not agree with these
regressions, conflict will follow. The libido is, as it were, cut
off and must try to escape in some direction where, in accordance with the requirements of the pleasure principle, it can
find a discharge for its cathexis of energy. It must withdraw
from the ego. An escape of this kind is offered it by the fixations
on the path of its development which it has now entered on
regressively—fixations from which the ego had protected itself
in the past by repressions. By cathecting these repressed positions as it flows backward, the libido has withdrawn from the
ego and its laws, and has at the same time renounced all the
education it has acquired under the ego’s influence. It was
docile so long as satisfaction beckoned to it; but under the
double pressure of external and internal frustration it becomes
refractory, and recalls earlier and better times. Such is the
libido’s fundamentally unchangeable character. The ideas to
which it now transfers its energy as a cathexis belong to the
system of the unconscious and are subject to the processes which
are possible there, particularly to condensation and displace­
ment. In this way conditions are established which completely
resemble those in dream-construction. The dream proper,

1

।
1
:
1

'

i
<
1
j

'
■

J

360

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

which has been completed in the unconscious and is the fulfil­
ment of an unconscious wishful phantasy, is brought up against
a portion of (pre) conscious activity which exercises the office of
censorship and which, when it has been indemnified, permits
the formation of the manifest dream as a compromise. In the
same way, what represents1 the libido in the unconscious has
to reckon with the power of the preconscious ego. The opposi­
tion which had been raised against it in the ego pursues it as an
‘anticathexis’12 and compels it to choose a form of expression
which can at the same time become an expression of the opposi­
tion itself. Thus the symptom emerges as a many-times-distorted
derivative of the unconscious libidinal wish-fulfilment, an in­
geniously chosen piece of ambiguity with two meanings in
complete mutual contradiction. In this last respect, however,
there is a distinction between the construction of a dream and of
a symptom. For in dream-formation the preconscious purpose
is merely concerned to preserve sleep, to allow nothing that
would disturb it to make its way into consciousness; it does not
insist upon calling out sharply ‘No! on the contrary!’ to the
unconscious wishful impulse. It can afford to be more tolerant
because the situation of someone sleeping is less perilous. The
state of sleep in itself bars any outlet into reality.
You see, then, that the libido’s escape under conditions of
conflict is made possible by the presence of fixations. The
regressive cathexis of these fixations leads to the circumvention
of the repression and to a discharge (or satisfaction) of the
libido, subject to the conditions of a compromise being ob­
served. By the roundabout path vid the unconscious and the old
fixations, the libido finally succeeds in forcing its way through
to real satisfaction—though to one which is extremely restricted
and scarcely recognizable as such. Let me add two comments
to this conclusion. First, I should like you to notice how closely
here the libido and the unconscious on one side and the ego,
consciousness and reality on the other are shown to be inter1 [‘Vertretung’, i.e. the representative in psychical terms of the libido
regarded as something somatic. A fuller discussion of this notion will be
found in the Editor’s Note to ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’ (1915c),
Standard Ed., 14, 111-13, and in especial in the footnote on 112.]
2 [That is, a force acting in a sense contrary to the primary instinctual
energy. See Section IV of‘The Unconscious’ (1915c), ibid., 181.]

r

XXIII. THE PATHS TO SYMPTOM-FORMATION 361

linked, although to begin with they did not belong together at
all. And secondly, I must ask you to bear in mind that every­
thing I have said about this and what is still to follow relates
only to the formation of symptoms in the neurosis of hysteria.
Where, then, does the libido find the fixations which it
requires in order to break through the repressions? In the
activities and experiences of infantile sexuality, in the aban­
doned component trends, in the objects of childhood which
have been given up. It is to them, accordingly, that the libido
returns. The significance of this period of childhood is twofold:
on the one hand, during it the instinctual trends which the
child has inherited with his innate disposition first become
manifest, and secondly, others of his instincts are for the first
time awakened and made active by external impressions and
accidental experiences. There is no doubt, I think, that we are
justified in making this twofold division. The manifestation of
the innate disposition is indeed not open- to any critical doubts,
but analytic experience actually compels us to assume that
purely chance experiences in childhood are able to leave fixa­
tions of the libido behind them. Nor do I see any theoretical
difficulty in this. Constitutional dispositions are also undoubt­
edly after-effects of experiences by ancestors in the past; they
too were once acquired. Without such acquisition there would
be no heredity. And is it conceivable that acquisition such as this,
leading to inheritance, would come to an end precisely with the
generation we are considering? The significance of infantile
experiences should not be totally neglected, as people like doing,
in comparison with the experiences of the subject’s ancestors
and of his own maturity; on the contrary, they call for particular
consideration. They are all the more momentous because they
occur in times of incomplete development and are for that very
reason liable to have traumatic effects. The studies on develop­
mental mechanics by Roux1 and others have shown that the
prick of a needle into an embryonic germinal layer in the act
of cell-division results in a severe disturbance of development.
The same injury inflicted on a larval or fully grown animal
would do no damage.
1 [Wilhelm Roux (1850-1924) was one of the founders of experi­
mental embryology.]

362

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

Thus fixation of the libido in the adult, which we introduced
into the aetiological equation of neurosis as representing the
constitutional factor [p. 346], now falls, for our purposes, into
two further parts: the inherited constitution and the disposition
acquired in early childhood. As we all know, a diagram is
certain of a sympathetic reception from students. So I will
summarize the position diagrammatically:1
Causation of Neurosis = Disposition due + Accidental [Adult]
to Fixation of
Experience
Libido
(Traumatic)

Sexual Constitution
(Prehistoric Experience)

-

,
!

•
I

,
,

Infantile Experience

The hereditary sexual constitution presents us with a great
variety of dispositions, according as one component instinct or
another, alone or in combination with others, is inherited in
particular strength. The sexual constitution forms once again,
together with the factor of infantile experience, a ‘complemental series’ exactly similar to the one we first came to know
between disposition and the accidental experience of the adult
[p. 347]. In both of them we find the same extreme cases and
the same relations between the two factors concerned. And
here the question suggests itself of whether the most striking
kinds of libidinal regressions—those to earlier stages of the
sexual organization—may not be predominantly determined
by the hereditary constitutional factor. But it is best to postpone
answering this question till we have been able to take a wider
range of forms of neurotic illness into account.
Let us dwell now on the fact that analytic research shows the
libido of neurotics tied to their infantile sexual experiences. It
1 [Readers may find this diagram easier to follow in the form of a
genealogical tree:
Sexual Constitution + Infantile Experience
(Prehistoric Experience)

Disposition due to + Accidental [Adult]
Fixation of Libido Experience (Traumatic)
[Neurosis]

XXIII. THE PATHS TO SYMPTOM-FORMATION 363

thus lends these the appearance of an enormous importance for
the life and illness of human beings. They retain this importance
undiminished so far as the work of therapeutics is concerned.
But if we turn away from that task we can nevertheless easily
see that there is a danger here of a misunderstanding which
might mislead us into basing our view of life too one-sidedly
on the neurotic situation. We must after all subtract from the
importance of infantile experiences the fact that the libido has
returned to them regressively, after being driven out of its later
positions. In that case the contrary conclusion becomes very
tempting—that these libidinal experiences had no importance
at all at the time they occurred but only acquired it regressively. You will recall that we have already considered a
similar alternative in our discussion of the Oedipus complex
[p. 336].
Once again we shall not find it hard to reach a decision. The
assertion that the libidinal cathexis (and therefore the patho­
genic significance) of the infantile experiences has been largely
intensified by the regression of the libido is undoubtedly correct,
but it would lead to error if we were to regard it alone as
decisive. Other considerations must be allowed weight as
well.
In the first place observation shows, in a manner that
excludes all doubt, that the infantile experiences have an impor­
tance of their own and give evidence of it already in childhood.
Children too have their neuroses, in which the factor of dis­
placement backwards in time is necessarily very much reduced
or is even completely absent, since the onset of the illness
follows the traumatic experiences immediately. The study of
these infantile neuroses protects us from more than one dan­
gerous misunderstanding of the neuroses of adults, just as the
dreams of children gave us the key to an understanding of
adult dreams.1 Children’s neuroses are very common, much
commoner than is supposed. They are often overlooked, re­
garded as signs of a bad. or naughty child, often, too, kept under
by the nursery authorities; but they can always be easily recog­
nized in retrospect. They usually appear in the form of anxiety
1 [See Lecture VIII. Freud was no doubt thinking here of his analysis
of the ‘Wolf Man’, which he had already completed though it was not
yet published: ‘From the History of an Infantile Neurosis’ (19186).]
s.f.

xvi—A A

364

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

hysteria. We shall learn on a later occasion what that means
[p. 400 below]. If a neurosis breaks out in later life, analysis
regularly reveals it as a direct continuation of the infantile ill­
ness which may have emerged as no more than a veiled hint.
As I have said, however, there are cases in which these signs of
neurosis in childhood proceed uninterruptedly into a lifelong
illness. We have been able to analyse a few examples of these
children’s neuroses in childhood itself—when they were actu­
ally present;1 but far more often we have had to be content with
someone who has fallen ill in adult life enabling us to obtain a
deferred insight into his childhood neurosis. In such cases we
must not fail to make certain corrections and take certain pre­
cautions.
In the second place, we must reflect that it would be in­
conceivable for the libido to regress so regularly to the period
of childhood unless there were something there to exercise an
attraction on it. The fixation which we have supposed to be
present at particular points in the course of development can
only have a meaning if we regard it as consisting in the reten­
tion of a certain quota of libidinal energy. And finally I may
point out to you that between the intensity and pathogenic
importance of infantile and of later experiences a complemental
relationship exists similar to the series we have already dis­
cussed. There are cases in which the whole weight of causation
falls on the sexual experiences of childhood, cases in which
those impressions exert a definitely traumatic effect and call for
no other support than can be afforded them by an average
sexual constitution and the fact of its incomplete development.
Alongside of these cases there are others in which the whole
accent lies on the later conflicts and the emphasis we find in
the analysis laid on the impressions of childhood appears
entirely as the work of regression. Thus we have extremes of
‘developmental inhibition’ and ‘regression’ and between them
every degree of co-operation between the two factors.
These facts have a certain interest from the point of view of
education, which plans the prevention of neuroses by interven­
ing at an early stage in children’s sexual development. So long
as one focuses attention principally on infantile sexual experi­
ences, one must suppose that one has done everything for the
1 [Cf. the case history of‘Little Hans’ (19096).]

XXIII. THE PATHS TO SYMPTOM-FORMATION 365

prophylaxis of nervous illnesses by taking care that the child’s
development is delayed and that it is spared experiences of the
sort. We already know, however, that the preconditions for the
causation of neuroses are complex and cannot be influenced in
general if we take account of only a single factor. Strict protection of the young loses value because it is powerless against
the constitutional factor. Besides, it is more difficult to carry out
than educationists imagine and it brings with it two fresh
dangers which must not be underestimated: the fact that it may
achieve too much—that it may encourage an excess of sexual
repression, with damaging results, and the fact that it may send
the child out into life without any defence against the onrush
of sexual demands that is to be looked for at puberty.1 Thus it
remains extremely doubtful how far prophylaxis in childhood
can be carried with advantage and whether an altered attitude
to the immediate situation may not offer a better angle of
approach for the prevention of neuroses.

।
'
।

;

i
I
;

f

,

।
।

Let us now go back to the symptoms. They create a substi­
tute, then, for the frustrated satisfaction by means of a regres­
sion of the libido to earlier times, with which a return to earlier
stages of object-choice or of the organization is inseparably
bound up. We discovered some time ago that neurotics are
anchored somewhere in their past;2 we know now that it is at
a period of their past in which their libido did not lack satisfac­
tion, in which they were happy. They search about in the
history of their life till they find a period of that sort, even if
they have to go back as far as the time when they were infants
in arms—as they remember it or as they imagine it from later
hints. In some way the symptom repeats this early infantile
kind of satisfaction, distorted by the censorship arising from the
conflict, turned as a rule to a feeling of suffering, and mingled
with elements from the precipitating cause of the illness. The
kind of satisfaction which the symptom brings has much that is
strange about it.
We may disregard the fact that it is unrecognizable to the
subject, who, on the contrary, feels the alleged satisfaction as
1 [Freud elaborated this difficulty in Lecture XXXIV of the New
Introductory Lectures (1933a), Standard Ed., 22, 149.]
2 [See for instance the beginning of Lecture XVIII, p. 273 above.]

i
I

I
I
I

366

,
ii,
1

'
|
‘
j
i
,
|
s
s
I

i

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

suffering and complains of it. This transformation is a function
of the psychical conflict under pressur e of which the symptom
had to be formed. What was once a satisfaction to the subject is,
indeed, bound to arouse his resistance or his disgust to-day.
We are familiar with a trivial but instructive model of this
change of mind. The same child who once eagerly sucked the
milk from his mother’s breast is likely a few years later to
display a strong dislike to drinking milk, which his upbringing
has difficulties in overcoming. This dislike increases to disgust
if a skin forms on the milk or the drink containing it. We
cannot exclude the possibility, perhaps, that the skin conjures
up a memory of the mother’s breast, once so ardently desired.
Between the two situations, however, there lies the experience
of weaning, with its traumatic effects.
It is something else besides that makes symptoms seem
strange to us and incomprehensible as a means of libidinal
satisfaction. They do not remind us in the very least of any­
thing from which we are in the habit of normally expecting
satisfaction. Usually they disregard objects and in so doing
abandon their relation to external reality. We can see that this
is a consequence of turning away from the reality principle and
of returning to the pleasure principle. But it is also a return to
a kind of extended auto-erotism, of the sort that offered the
sexual instinct its first satisfactions. In place of a change in the
external world these substitute a change in the subject’s own
body: they set an internal act in place of an external one, an
adaptation in place of an action—once again, something that
corresponds, phylogenetically, to a highly significant regression.
We shall only understand this in connection with something
new that we have still to learn from the analytic researches into
the formation of symptoms. We must further remember that
the same processes belonging to the unconscious play a part in
the formation of symptoms as in the formation of dreams—
namely, condensation and displacement. A symptom, like a
dream, represents something as fulfilled: a satisfaction in the
infantile maimer. But by means of extreme condensation that
satisfaction can be compressed into a single sensation or inner­
vation, and by means of extreme displacement it can be restric­
ted to one small detail of the entire libidinal complex. It is not
to be wondered at if we, too, often have difficulty in recognizing

‘

XXIII. THE PATHS TO SYMPTOM-FORMATION 367

in a symptom the libidinal satisfaction whose presence we sus­
pect and which is invariably confirmed.

1
l

I

*■

I

I

i

I have warned you that we still have something new to learn;
it is indeed something surprising and perplexing. By means of
analysis, as you know, starting from the symptoms, we arrive
at a knowledge of the infantile experiences to which the libido
is fixated and out of which the symptoms are made. Well, the
surprise lies in the fact that these scenes from infancy are not
always true. Indeed, they are not true in the majority of cases,
and in a few of them they are the direct opposite of the his­
torical truth. As you will see, this discovery is calculated more
than any other to discredit either analysis, which has led to this
result, or the patients, on whose statements the analysis and our
whole understanding of the neuroses are founded. But there is
something else remarkably perplexing about it. If the infantile
experiences brought to light by analysis were invariably real,
we should feel that we were standing on firm ground; if they
were regularly falsified and revealed as inventions, as phan­
tasies of the patient, we should be obliged to abandon this
shaky ground and look for salvation elsewhere. But neither of
these things is the case: the position can be shown to be that the
childhood experiences constructed or remembered in analysis
are sometimes indisputably false and sometimes equally cer­
tainly correct, and in most cases compounded of truth and
falsehood. Sometimes, then, symptoms represent events which
really took place and to which we may attribute an influence on
the fixation of the libido, and sometimes they represent phan­
tasies of the patient’s which are not, of course, suited to playing
an aetiological role. It is difficult to find one’s way about in
this. We can make a first start, perhaps, with a similar dis­
covery—namely, that the isolated childhood memories that
people have possessed consciously from time immemorial and
before there was any such thing as analysis [p. 200 above] may
equally be falsified or at least may combine truth and falsehood
in plenty. In their case there is seldom any difficulty in showing
their incorrectness;f so we at least have the reassurance of
t knowing that the responsibility for this unexpected disappointment
lies, not with analysis, but in some way with the patients.
After a little reflection we shall easily understand what it is

<

«

।
I

i

■

368

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

about this state of things that perplexes us so much. It is the
low valuation of reality, the neglect of the distinction between
:
it and phantasy. We are tempted to feel offended at the patient’s
having taken up our time with invented stories. Reality seems
to us something worlds apart from invention, and we set a very
different value on it. Moreover the patient, too, looks at things
in this light in his normal thinking. When he brings up the
material which leads from behind his symptoms to the wishful
situations modelled on his infantile experiences, we are in
doubt to begin with whether we are dealing with reality or
phantasies. Later, we are enabled by certain indications to come
to a decision and we are faced by the task of conveying it to the
patient. This, however, invariably gives rise to difficulties. If we
it
begin by telling him straight away that he is now engaged in
;
bringing to light the phantasies with which he has disguised the
I
history of his childhood (just as every nation disguises its for­
gotten prehistory by constructing legends), we observe that his
interest in pursuing the subject further suddenly diminishes in
an undesirable fashion. He too wants to experience realities and
l
despises everything that is merely ‘imaginary’. If, however, we
J
leave him, till this piece of work is finished, in the belief that we
!are occupied in investigating the real events of his childhood,
we run the risk of his later on accusing us of being mistaken and
laughing at us for our apparent credulity. It will be a long time
before he can take in our proposal that we should equate phan­
tasy and reality and not bother to begin with whether the child­
hood experiences under examination are the one or the other.
Yet this is clearly the only correct attitude to adopt towards
I
these mental productions. They too possess a reality of a sort.
“
It remains a fact that the patient has created these phantasies
for himself, and this fact is of scarcely less importance for his
neurosis than if he had really experienced what the phantasies
contain. The phantasies possess psychical as contrasted with
material reality, and we gradually learn to understand that in
the world of the neuroses it is psychical reality which is the decisive kind.

i

Among the occurrences which recur again and again in the
youthful history of neurotics—which are scarcely ever absent
—there are a few of particular importance, which also deserve
on that account, I think, to be brought into greater prominence

J

XXIII. THE PATHS TO SYMPTOM-FORMATION 369

than the rest. As specimens of this class I will enumerate these:
observation of parental intercourse, seduction by an adult and
threat of being castrated. It would be a mistake to suppose that
they are never characterized by material reality; on the con­
trary, this is often established incontestably through enquiries
from older members of the patient’s family. It is by no means a
rare thing, for instance, for a little boy, who is beginning to
play with his penis in a naughty way and is not yet aware that
one must conceal such activities, to be threatened by a parent
or nurse with having his penis or his sinful hand cut off.
Parents will often admit this when they are asked, since they
think they have done something useful in making such a threat;
a number of people have a correct conscious memory of such a
threat, especially if it was made at a somewhat later period. If
the threat is delivered by the mother or some other female she
usually shifts its performance on to the father—or the doctor.
In Stnavwelpeter, the famous work of the Frankfurt paedia­
trician Hoffmann (which owes its popularity precisely to an
understanding of the sexual and other complexes of childhood),
you will find castration softened into a cutting-off of the thumbs
as a punishment for obstinate sucking. But it is highly improbable that children are threatened with castration as often
as it appears in the analyses of neurotics. We shall be satisfied by
realizing that the child puts a threat of this kind together in his
imagination on the basis of hints, helped out by a knowledge
that auto-erotic satisfaction is forbidden and under the impres­
sion of his discovery of the female genitals. [Cf. p. 317 above.]
Nor is it only in proletarian families that it is perfectly possible
for a child, while he is not yet credited with possessing an
understanding or a memory, to be a witness of the sexual act
between his parents or other grown-up people; and the pos­
sibility cannot be rejected that he will be able to understand
and react to the impression in retrospect. If, however, the inter­
course is described with the most minute details, which would
be difficult to observe, or if, as happens most frequently, it
turns out to have been intercourse from behind, more ferarum
[in the manner of animals], there can be no remaining doubt
that the phantasy is based on an observation of intercourse
between animals (such as dogs) and that its motive was the
child’s unsatisfied scopophilia during puberty. The extreme

i

;
|
I
i
|

I

I
i

370

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

achievement on these lines is a phantasy of observing parental
intercourse while one is still an unborn baby in the womb.
Phantasies of being seduced are of particular interest, because
so often they are not phantasies but real memories. Fortunately,
however, they are nevertheless not real as often as seemed at
first to be shown by the findings of analysis. Seduction by an
older child or by one of the same age is even more frequent than
by an adult; and if in the case of girls who produce such an
event in the story of their childhood their father figures fairly
regularly as the seducer, there can be no doubt either of the
imaginary nature of the accusation or of the motive that has led
to it.1 A phantasy of being seduced when no seduction has
occurred is usually employed by a child to screen the auto­
erotic period of his sexual activity. He spares himself shame
about masturbation by retrospectively phantasying a desired
object into these earliest times. You must not suppose, however,
that sexual abuse of a child by its nearest male relatives be­
longs entirely to the realm of phantasy. Most analysts will have
treated cases in which such events were real and could be un­
impeachably established; but even so they related to the later
years of childhood and had been transposed into earlier times.
The only impression we gain is that these events of childhood
are somehow demanded as a necessity, that they are among the
essential elements of a neurosis. If they have occurred in reality,
so much to the good; but if they have been withheld by reality,
they are put together from hints and supplemented by phan­
tasy. The outcome is the same, and up to the present we have
not succeeded in pointing to any difference in the consequences,
whether phantasy or reality has had the greater share in these
events of childhood. Here we simply have once again one of the
complemental relations that I have so often mentioned; more­
over it is the strangest of all we have met with. Whence comes
the need for these phantasies and the material for them? There
can be no doubt that their sources lie in the instincts; but it has
still to be explained why the same phantasies with the same
content are created on every occasion. I am prepared with an
1 [Cf. a later reference to this, with a further explanation, in Freud’s
paper on ‘Female Sexuality’ (19316), Standard Ed., 21, 238. A full his­
tory of Freud’s views on this subject is given in an Editor’s footnote to
the New Introductory Lectures (1933a), ibid., 22, 120-1.]

XXIII. THE PATHS TO SYMPTOM-FORMATION 371

answer which I know will seem daring to you. I believe these
primal phantasies, as I should like to call them, and no doubt a
few others as well, are a phylogenetic endowment. In them the
individual reaches beyond his own experience into primaeval
experience at points where his own experience has been too
rudimentary. It seems to me quite possible that all the things
that are told to us to-day in analysis as phantasy—the seduction
of children, the inflaming of sexual excitement by observing
parental intercourse, the threat of castration (or rather cas­
tration itself)—were once real occurrences in the primaeval
times of the human family, and that children in their
phantasies are simply filling in the gaps in individual truth
with prehistoric truth. I have repeatedly been led to sus­
pect that the psychology of the neuroses has stored up in it
more of the antiquities of human development than any other
source.1

The things I have just been discussing, Gentlemen, compel
me to enter more closely into the origin and significance of the
mental activity which is described as ‘phantasy’ [or ‘imagina­
tion’].1
2 As you are aware, it enjoys a universally high reputa­
tion, without its position in mental life having become clear.
I have the following remarks to make about it. The human ego
is, as you know, slowly educated by the pressure of external
necessity to appreciate reality and obey the reality principle;
in the course of this process it is obliged to renounce, tempor­
arily or permanently, a variety of the objects and aims at which
its striving for pleasure, and not only for sexual pleasure, is
directed. But men have always found it hard to renounce
pleasure; they cannot bring themselves to do it without some
kind of compensation. They have therefore retained a mental
1 [This discussion of ‘primal phantasies’ and the possibility of their
being inherited was based to a considerable extent on Freud’s findings
in his ‘Wolf Man’ case history (19184), which he had completed two
or three years earlier. When he came to publish it (in the year following
that in which this lecture was delivered), he added two long passages
to his original draft, referring back to the present discussion. Cf.
Standard Ed., 17, 57-60 and 95-7.]
2 [Freud’s main earlier discussions of phantasy will be found in
‘Creative Writers and Day-Dreaming’ (1908e) and ‘Hysterical Phan­
tasies and their Relation to Bisexuality’ (1908a).]

372

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

activity in which all these abandoned sources of pleasure and
methods of achieving pleasure are granted a further existence
—a form of existence in which they are left free from the claims
of reality and of what we call ‘reality-testing’.1 Every desire
takes before long the form of picturing its own fulfilment; there
is no doubt that dwelling upon imaginary wish-fulfilments
brings satisfaction with it, although it does not interfere with a
knowledge that what is concerned is not real. Thus in the
activity of phantasy human beings continue to enjoy the free­
dom from external compulsion which they have long since
renounced in reality. They have contrived to alternate be­
tween remaining an animal of pleasure and being once more a
creature of reason. Indeed, they cannot subsist on the scanty
satisfaction which they can extort from reality. ‘We cannot do
without auxiliary constructions’, as Theodor Fontane once
said.2 The creation of the mental realm of phantasy finds a
perfect parallel in the establishment of ‘reservations’ or ‘nature
reserves’ in places where the requirements of agriculture,
communications and industry threaten to bring about changes
in the original face of the earth which will quickly make it un­
recognizable. A nature reserve preserves its original state which
everywhere else has to our regret been sacrificed to necessity.
Everything, including what is useless and even what is noxious,
can grow and proliferate there as it pleases. The mental realm
of phantasy is just such a reservation withdrawn from the
reality principle.
The best-known productions of phantasy are the so-called
‘day-dreams’, which we have already come across [p. 98],
imagined satisfactions of ambitious, megalomanic, erotic
wishes, which flourish all the more exuberantly the more reality
counsels modesty and restraint. The essence of the happiness
of phantasy—making the obtaining of pleasure free once more
from the assent of reality—is shown in them unmistakably. We
know that such day-dreams are the nucleus and prototype of
1 [I.e. the process of judging whether things are real or not. The
deeper implications of this are discussed in the metapsychological paper
on dreams (1917d), Standard Ed., 14, 230-4; for full references see the
Editor’s Note to that paper, ibid., 220-1.]
* [Freud quoted this again in a similar connection in Chapter II of
Civilization and its Discontents (1930a), Standard Ed., 21, 75.]

XXIII. THE PATHS TO SYMPTOM-FORMATION 373

night-dreams. A night-dream is at bottom nothing other than a
day-dream that has been made utilizable owing to the libera­
tion of the instinctual impulses at night, and that has been dis­
torted by the form assumed by mental activity at night. We
have already become familiar with the idea that even a day­
dream is not necessarily conscious—that there are unconscious
day-dreams, as well [p. 368]. Such unconscious day-dreams are
thus the source not only of night-dreams but also of neurotic
symptoms.1
The importance of the part played by phantasy in the forma­
tion of symptoms will be made clear to you by what I have to
tell you. I have explained [p. 359] how in the case of frustration
the libido cathects regressively the positions which it has given
up but to which some quotas of it have remained adhering. I
shall not withdraw this or correct it, but I have to insert a
connecting link. How does the libido find its way to these points
of fixation? All the objects and trends which the libido has
given up have not yet been given up in every sense. They or
their derivatives are still retained with a certain intensity in
phantasies. Thus the libido need only withdraw on to phan­
tasies in order to find the path open to every repressed fixation.
These phantasies have enjoyed a certain amount of toleration:
they have not come into conflict with the ego, however sharp
the contrasts between them may have been, so long as a par­
ticular condition is observed. This condition is of a quantitative
nature and it is now upset by the backward flow of libido on to
the phantasies. As a result of this surplus, the energic cathexis
of the phantasies is so much increased that they begin to raise
claims, that they develop a pressure in the direction of becom­
ing realized. But this makes a conflict between them and the
ego inevitable. Whether they were previously preconscious or
conscious, they are now subjected to repression from the direc­
tion of the ego and are at the mercy of attraction from the
direction of the unconscious. From what are now unconscious
phantasies the libido travels back to their origins in the uncon­
scious—to its own points of fixation.
The libido’s retreat to phantasy is an intermediate stage on
the path to the formation of symptoms and it seems to call for a
1 [Cf. a long footnote added by Freud in 1920 to the third of his Three
Essays (19050, Standard Ed., 7, 226.]

376

।

1
I

I
l
»
'

;
f

!
1
'

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

art. An artist is once more in rudiments an introvert, not far
removed from neurosis. He is oppressed by excessively powerful
instinctual needs. He desires to win honour, power, wealth,
fame and the love of women; but he lacks the means for achiev­
ing these satisfactions. Consequently, like any other unsatisfied
man, he turns away from reality and transfers all his interest,
and his libido too, to the wishful constructions of his life of
phantasy, whence the path might lead to neurosis. There must
be, no doubt, a convergence of all kinds of things if this is not
to be the complete outcome of his development; it is well known,
indeed, how often artists, in particular suffer from a partial
inhibition of theif-efficiency owing to neurosis. Their constitu­
tion probably includes a strong capacity for sublimation and a
certain degree of laxity in the repressions which are decisive for
a conflict. An artist, however, finds a path back to reality in the
following manner. To be sure, he is not the only one who leads a
life of phantasy. Access to the half-way region of phantasy is
permitted by the universal assent of mankind, and everyone
suffering from privation expects to derive alleviation and con­
solation from it. But for those who are not artists the yield of
pleasure to be derived from the sources of phantasy is very
limited. The ruthlessness of their repressions forces them to be
content with such meagre day-dreams as are allowed to become
conscious. A man who is a true artist has more at his disposal.
In the first place, he understands how to work over his daydreams in such a way as to make them lose what is too personal
about them and repels strangers, and to make it possible for
others to share in the enjoyment of them. He understands, too,
how to tone them down so that they do not easily betray their
origin from proscribed sources. Furthermore, he possesses the
mysterious power of shaping some particular material until it
has become a faithful image of his phantasy; and he knows,
moreover, how to link so large a yield of pleasure to this repre­
sentation of his unconscious phantasy that, for the time being
at least, repressions are outweighed and lifted by it. If he is able
to accomplish all this, he makes it possible for other people
once more to derive consolation and alleviation from their own
sources of pleasure in their unconscious which have become
inaccessible to them; he earns their gratitude and admiration
and he has thus achieved through his phantasy what originally

>

V -■
■&
XXIII. THE PATHS TO SYMPTOM-FORMATION 377
he had achieved only in his phantasy—honour, power and the
love of women.1

1 [Cf. ‘Creative Writers and Day-Dreaming’ (1908e), Standard Ed.,
9, 153, the fifth of Freud’s Five Lectures (1910a), ibid., 11, 50, ‘Two

Principles of Mental Functioning’ (191 li), ibid., 12, 224, and Section
II (F) ofhis contribution to Scientia (1913/), ibid., 13, 187-8.]

I

I

LECTURE XXIV

THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE

j
11
11
■’
'I

।
।
i

I
I
!

‘
।
I

Ladies and Gentlemen,—Now that we have disposed of such
a difficult piece of work in our last discussions, I propose for a
time to leave the subject and turn to you yourselves.
For I am aware that you are dissatisfied. You pictured an
‘Introduction to Psycho-Analysis’ 1 very differently. What you
expected to hear were lively examples, not theory. On one
occasion, you say, when I told you the parable of ‘In the Base­
ment and on the First Floor’ [p. 352], you grasped something
of the way in which neuroses are caused; the observations
should have been real ones, however, and not made-up stories.
Or when at the start I described two symptoms to you (not
invented ones this time, let us hope) and described their solution and their relation to the patients’ lives [p. 261], the ‘sense’
of symptoms dawned on you. You hoped I should go on along
those fines. But instead I gave you long-winded theories, hard
to grasp, which were never complete but were always having
something fresh added to them; I worked with concepts which
I had not yet explained to you; I went from a descriptive
account of things to a dynamic one and from that to what I
called an ‘economic’ one; I made it hard for you to understand
how many of the technical terms I used meant the same thing
and were merely being interchanged for reasons of euphony; I
brought up such far-reaching conceptions as those of the
pleasure and reality principles and of phylogenetically in­
herited endowments; and, far from introducing you to any­
thing, I paraded something before your eyes which constantly
grew more and more remote from you.
Why did I not begin my introduction to the theory of
neuroses with what you yourselves know of the neurotic state
and what has long aroused your interest—with the peculiar
characteristics of neurotic people, their incomprehensible reactions to human intercourse and external influences, their
irritability, their incalculable and inexpedient behaviour? Why
1 [See p. 9 above.]
-

378

i

XXIV. THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE

379

did I not lead you step by step from an understanding of the ,
simpler, everyday forms of the neurotic state to the problems
of its enigmatic, extreme manifestations?
Indeed, Gentlemen, I cannot even disagree with you. I am
not so enamoured of my skill in exposition that I can declare
each of its artistic faults to be a peculiar charm. I think myself
that it might have been more to your advantage if I had pro­
ceeded otherwise; and that was, indeed, my intention. But one
cannot always carry out one’s reasonable intentions. There is
often something in the material itself which takes charge of
one and diverts one from one’s first intentions. Even such a
trivial achievement as the arrangement of a familiar piece of
material is not entirely subject to an author’s own choice;
'
it takes what line it likes and all one can do is to ask one'
self after the event why it has happened in this way and no
other.
f
One reason is probably that the title ‘Introduction to PsychoAnalysis’ is no longer applicable to the present section, which
is supposed to deal with the neuroses. An introduction to
psycho-analysis is provided by the study of parapraxes and
dreams; the theory of the neuroses is psycho-analysis itself. It
would not, I believe, have been possible to give you a know­
ledge of the subject-matter of the theory of the neuroses in so
I
short a time except in this concentrated form. It was a question
I
of presenting you with a connected account of the sense and
(significance of symptoms and of the external and internal determinants and mechanism of their formation. That is what I have
tried to do; it is more or less the nucleus of what psycho­
analysis has to teach to-day. It involved saying a great deal
about the libido and its development and a little, too, about
that of the ego. Our introduction had already prepared you
in advance for the premisses of our technique and for the
major considerations of the unconscious and of repression (of
resistance). You will discover from one of the next lectures
[Lecture XXVI] the points from which the work of psychoI
analysis makes its further organic advance. For the time being
|
I have made no secret of the fact that everything I have said is
derived from the study of a single group of nervous disorders—
।
what are termed the ‘transference neuroses’. Indeed, I have
traced the mechanism of symptom-formation in the case only
!■

I

S.F. XVI—B B

,

|
I
|
j

j
t
i

'

380

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

of the hysterical neurosis. Even if you have acquired no
thorough knowledge and have not retained every detail, yet I
hope that you have formed some picture of the methods by
which psycho-analysis works, of the problems which it attacks
and of the results at which it has arrived.
I have credited you with a wish that I might have started my
description of the neuroses from the behaviour of neurotic
people, from an account of the manner in which they suffer
under their neurosis, of how they defend themselves against it
and how they come to terms with it. No doubt that is an in­
teresting topic, worth investigating; nor would it be very diffi­
cult to handle. But it would be of debatable wisdom to start
with it. There would be a risk of not discovering the uncon­
scious and at the same time of overlooking the great importance
of the libido and ofjudging everything as it appears to the ego
of the neurotic subject. It is obvious that this ego is not a trust­
worthy or impartial agency. The ego is indeed the power which
disavows the unconscious and has degraded it into being re­
pressed; so how can we trust it to be fair to the unconscious?
The most prominent elements in what is thus repressed are the
repudiated demands of sexuality, and it is quite self-evident that
we should never be able to guess their extent and importance
from the ego’s conceptions. From the moment the notion of re­
pression dawns on us, we are warned against making one of the
two contesting parties (and the victorious one, at that) into
being judge in the dispute. We are prepared to find that the
ego’s assertions will lead us astray. If we are to believe the ego,
it was active at every point and itself willed and created its
symptoms. But we know that it puts up with a good amount of
passivity, which it afterwards tries to disguise and gloss over. It
is true that it does not always venture on such an attempt; in
the symptoms of obsessional neurosis it is obliged to admit that
there is something alien which is confronting it and against
which it can only defend itself with difficulty.
Anyone whom these warnings do not deter from taking the
ego’s counterfeits as sterling coin will have an easy time of it
and will avoid all the resistances which oppose the psycho­
analytic emphasis upon the unconscious, sexuality and the
passivity of the ego. He will be able to declare like Alfred Adler

XXIV. THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE

381

that the ‘neurotic character’1 is the cause of neuroses instead of
their consequence; but neither will he be in a position to explain
a single detail of symptom-formation or a single dream.
You will ask whether it may not be possible, however, to do
justice to the part played by the ego in neurotic states and in
the formation of symptoms without at the same time grossly
neglecting the factors revealed by psycho-analysis. My reply is
that that must certainly be possible and will sooner or later be
done; but the road followed by the work of psycho-analysis
does not admit of actually beginning with this. It is of course
possible to foresee when psycho-analysis will be confronted
by this task. There are neuroses in which the ego plays a far
more intensive part than in those we have studied hitherto;
we call them the ‘narcissistic ’ neuroses. The investigation of
these disorders will enable us to form an impartial and
trustworthy judgement of the share taken by the ego in the onset
of neuroses.2

One of the ways in which the ego is related to its neuroses is,
however, so obvious that it was possible to take it into account
from the first. It seems never to be absent; but it is most clearly
recognizable in a disorder which we are even to-day far from
understanding—traumatic neurosis. For you must know that the
same factors always come into operation in the causation and
mechanism of every possible form of neurosis; but the chief
importance in the construction of the symptoms falls now upon
one and now upon another of these factors. The position is like
that among the members of a theatrical company. Each of them
is regularly cast for his own stock role—hero, confidant, villain,
and so on; but each of them will choose a different piece for his
benefit performance. In the same way phantasies which turn
into symptoms are nowhere more obvious than in hysteria; the
anticathexes or reaction-formations of the ego dominate the
picture in obsessional neurosis; what in the case of dreams we
have termed ‘secondary revision’ [p. 182] stands in the fore­
front in paranoia in the shape of delusions, and so on.
1 [Uber den nervosen Charakter (1912) was the title of one of Adler’s
earlier works. The title of its English translation is The Neurotic Constitu­
tion.']
1 [Freud deals further with this in Lecture XXVI below.]

I

382

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

Thus in traumatic neuroses, and particularly in those brought
about by the horrors of war, we are unmistakably presented
with a self-interested motive on the part of the ego, seeking for
protection and advantage—a motive which cannot, perhaps,
create the illness by itself but which assents to it and maintains
it when once it has come about. This motive tries to preserve
the ego from the dangers the threat of which was the pre­
cipitating cause of the illness and it will not allow recovery to
occur until a repetition of these dangers seems no longer
possible or until compensation has been received for the danger
that has been endured.1
The ego takes a similar interest, however, in the development
and maintenance of the neurosis in every other case. I have
already shown [p. 359] that symptoms are supported by the
ego, too, because they have a side with which they offer satis­
faction to the repressing purpose of the ego. Moreover, settling
the conflict by constructing a symptom is the most convenient
way out and the one most agreeable to the pleasure principle:
it unquestionably spares the ego a large amount of internal
work which is felt as distressing. Indeed there are cases in
which even the physician must admit that for a conflict to end
in neurosis is the most harmless and socially tolerable solution.
You must not be surprised to hear that even the physician may
occasionally take the side of the illness he is combating. It is not
his business to restrict himself in every situation in life to being
a fanatic in favour of health. He knows that there is not only
neurotic misery in the world but real, irremovable suffering as
well, that necessity may even require a person to sacrifice his
health; and he learns that a sacrifice of this kind made by a
single person can prevent immeasurable unhappiness for many
others. If we may say, then, that whenever a neurotic is faced
by a conflict he takes flight into illness,2 yet we must allow that
in some cases that flight is fully justified, and a physician who
has recognized how the situation lies will silently and solicitously
withdraw.
1 [Cf. Freud’s studies on the war neuroses (1915W and 1955c [1920]),
Standard Ed., 17, 207 ff.]
’ [This phrase appeared first in Freud’s paper on hysterical attacks
(1909a), Standard Ed., 9, 231-2, where some further references will be
found.]

XXIV. THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE

i

1
1

;
,

I
'
i
■
t

|
;
'

।

,
,

383

But let us disregard these exceptional cases and proceed with
our discussion. In average circumstances we recognize that by
escaping into a neurosis the ego obtains a certain internal ‘gain
from illness’. In some circumstances of life this is further accom­
panied by an appreciable external advantage bearing a greater
or less real value. Consider the commonest example of this sort.
A woman who is roughly treated and ruthlessly exploited by her
husband will fairly regularly find a way out in neurosis, if her
constitution makes it possible, if she is too cowardly or too moral
to console herself secretly with another man, if she is not strong
enough to separate from her husband in the face of every external deterrent, if she has no prospect of supporting herself or
obtaining a better husband and ifin addition she is still attached
to this brutal husband by her sexual feelings. Her illness now
becomes a weapon in her battle with her dominating husband
—a weapon which she can use for her defence and misuse for
her revenge. To complain of her illness is allowable, though to
lament her marriage was probably not. She finds a helper in
her doctor, she forces her usually inconsiderate husband to look
after her, to spend money on her, to allow her at times to be
away from home and so free from her married oppression,
When an external or accidental gain from illness like this is
really considerable and no real substitute for it is available, you
must not reckon very high the chances of influencing the
neurosis by your treatment.
You will now protest that what I have told you about the
gain from illness argues entirely in favour of the view I have
rejected—that the ego itself wills and creates the neurosis
[p. 380]. Not too fast, Gentlemen! It may perhaps mean noth­
ing more than that the ego puts up with the neurosis, which it
cannot, after all, prevent, and that it makes the best of it, if
anything can be made of it at all. That is only one side of the
business, the pleasant side, it is true. So far as the neurosis has
advantages the ego no doubt accepts it; but it does not only
have advantages. As a rule it soon turns out that the ego has
made a bad bargain by letting itself in for the neurosis. It has
paid too dearly for an alleviation of the conflict, and the suffer­
ings attached to the symptoms are perhaps an equivalent sub­
stitute for the torments of the conflict, but they probably in­
volve an increase in unpleasure. The ego would like to free itself

384
I
I

I
I

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

from this unpleasure of the symptoms without giving up the
gain from illness, and this is just what it cannot achieve. This
shows, then, that it was not so entirely active as it thought it
was; and we shall bear this well in mind.
In your contact as doctors with neurotics, Gentlemen, you
will soon give up expecting that the ones who raise the most
lamentations and complaints about their illness will be the most
eager to co-operate and will offer you the least resistance. It is
rather the opposite. But of course you will easily realize that
everything that contributes to the gain from illness will inten­
sify the resistance due to repression and will increase the thera­
peutic difficulties. But to the portion of gain from illness which
is, so to say, born with the illness we have to add another por­
tion which arises later. When a psychical organization like an
illness has lasted for some time, it behaves eventually like an in­
dependent organism; it manifests something like a self-preserva­
tive instinct; it establishes a kind of modus vivendi between itself
and other parts of the mind, even with those which are at bot­
tom hostile to it; and there can scarcely fail to be occasions
when it proves once again useful and expedient and acquires,
as it were, a secondary function which strengthens its stability
afresh. Instead of an example from pathology, let us take a
glaring instance from daily life. A capable working-man, who
earns his living, is crippled by an accident in the course of his
occupation. The injured man can no longer work, but eventu­
ally he obtains a small disablement pension, and he learns how
to exploit his mutilation by begging. His new, though worsened,
means of livelihood is based precisely on the very thing that
deprived him of his former means of livelihood. If you could put
an end to his injury you would make him, to begin with, without
means of subsistence; the question would arise of whether he was
still capable of taking up his earlier work again. What corre­
sponds in the case of neuroses to a secondary exploitation like
this of an illness may be described as the secondary gain from
illness in contrast to the primary one.1
1 [The distinction between the two different kinds of gain from illness
had been indicated by Freud in a letter to Fliess of November 18, 1897
(Freud, 1950a, Letter 76), though it was first made explicit in the paper
(1909a) quoted in the last footnote. The question had already been dis­
cussed at some length in the ‘Dora’ case history (1905e), Standard Ed.,

XXIV. THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE

385

In general, however, I should like to recommend that, while
not under-estimating the practical importance of the gain from
illness, you should not let yourselves be impressed by it theo­
retically. After all, apart from the exceptions I recognized
earlier [p. 382], it always calls to mind the examples of‘animal
intelligence’ illustrated by Oberlander in Fliegende Blatter.1 An
Arab was riding his camel along a narrow path cut in the steep
face of a mountain. At a turn in the path he suddenly found
himself face to face with a lion, which prepared to make a
spring. He saw no way out: on one side a perpendicular cliff
and on the other a precipice; retreat and flight were impossible.
He gave himself up for lost. But the animal thought otherwise.
He took one leap with his rider into the abyss—and the lion
was left in the lurch. The help provided by a neurosis has as a
rule no better success with the patient. This may be because
dealing with a conflict by forming symptoms is after all an auto­
matic process which cannot prove adequate to meeting the
demands of life, and in which the subject has abandoned the use
of his best and highest powers. If there were a choice, it would
be preferable to go down in an honourable struggle with fate.
But I still owe you further enlightenment, Gentlemen, on my
reasons for not starting my account of the theory of the neuroses
with the common neurotic state. You may perhaps suppose that
it was because in that case I should have had greater difficulty
in proving the sexual causation of the neuroses. But you would
be wrong there. In the case of the transference neuroses one
must work one’s way through the interpretation of symptoms
before one can arrive at that discovery. In the common forms
of what are known as the ‘actual neuroses’ 2 the aetiological
significance of sexual life is a crude fact that springs to the
7,42-5, where the instances of the crippled beggar and of the ill-treated
wife appear again. But the analysis there was later considered incorrect
by Freud, who added a long footnote in 1923 (ibid., 43), which gives
perhaps the clearest account of the matter.]
1 [See footnote 2, p. 28.]
1 Aktualneurosen.' ‘Aktual’, like the French ‘actuel’, has the sense of
‘contemporary’, ‘of the present moment’. The epithet is applied to this
group of neuroses because their causes are purely contemporary and do
not, as in the case of the psychoneuroses, have their origin in the patient’s
past life. ‘Actual neuroses’ is the accepted translation.]

386

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

observer’s eyes. I came upon it more than twenty years ago
when one day I asked myself the question of why in the
examination of neurotics their sexual activities were so regu­
larly excluded from consideration. At that time I sacrificed my
popularity with my patients for the sake of these enquiries; but
after only a brief effort I was able to declare that ‘if the vita
sexualis is normal, there can be no neurosis’—and by this I
meant no ‘actual neurosis’.1 No doubt this statement passes too
lightly over people’s individual differences; it suffers, too, from
the indefiniteness inseparable from the judgement of what is
‘normal’. But as a rough guide it retains its value to this day.
I had by then reached the point of establishing specific relations
between particular forms of neurosis and particular sexual
noxae; and I have no doubt that I could repeat the same
observations to-day if similar pathological material were still at
my disposal. I found often enough that a man who indulged in
a certain kind of incomplete sexual satisfaction (for instance,
manual masturbation) had fallen ill of a particular form of
‘actual neurosis’, and that this neurosis promptly gave place to
another if he replaced this sexual regime by another equally far
from being irreproachable. I was then in a position to infer the
change in a patient’s sexual mode of life from an alteration in
his condition.2 I also learnt then to stand obstinately by my
suspicions till I had overcome the patients’ disingenuousness
and compelled them to confirm my views. It is true that there­
after they preferred to go to other doctors who did not make
such keen enquiries about their sexual life.
Even at that time I could not fail to notice that the causation
of the illness did not always point to sexual life. One person, it
was true, fell ill directly from a sexual noxa; but another did so
because he had lost his fortune or had been through an exhaust­
ing organic illness. The explanation of these varieties came
later, when we gained an insight into the suspected interrela1 [This is quoted from a paper on sexuality in the aetiology of the
neuroses contributed by Freud to a volume of Lowenfeld’s (Freud,
1906a), Standard Ed., 7, 274. But he had reached the conclusion more
than ten years earlier, and expressed it in almost the same words, in his
two papers on anxiety neurosis (18956 andf), where a large part ofwhat
follows is already to be found.]
2 [Cf. an example of this in an early paper of Freud’s (1898a),
Standard Ed., 3, 273-4.]

XXIV. THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE

387

tions between the ego and the libido, and the explanation became the more satisfactory the deeper that insight extended. A
person only falls ill of a neurosis if his ego has lost the capacity to
allocate his libido in some way. The stronger is his ego, the
easier will it be for it to carry out that task. Any weakening
of his ego from whatever cause must have the same effect as an
excessive increase in the claims of the libido and will thus make
it possible for him to fall ill of a neurosis. There are other and
more intimate relations between the ego and the libido;1 but
these have not yet come within our scope, so I will not bring
them up as part of my present explanation. What remains essen­
tial and makes things clear to us is that, in every case and no
matter how the illness is set going, the symptoms of the neurosis
are sustained by the libido and are consequently evidence that
it is being employed abnormally.
Now, however, I must draw your attention to the decisive
difference between the symptoms of the ‘actual’ neuroses and
those of the psychoneuroses, the first group of which, the trans­
ference neuroses, have occupied us so much hitherto. In both
cases the symptoms originate from the libido, and are thus
abnormal employments of it, substitutive satisfactions. But the
symptoms of the ‘actual’ neuroses—intracranial pressure, sensa­
tions of pain, a state of irritation in an organ, weakening or
inhibition of a function—have no ‘sense’, no psychical meaning.
They are not only manifested predominantly in the body (as
are hysterical symptoms, for instance, as well), but they are also
themselves entirely somatic processes, in the generating of
which all the complicated mental mechanisms we have come
to know are absent. Thus they really are what psychoneurotic
symptoms were so long believed to be. But if so, how can they
correspond to employments of the libido, which we have recog­
nized as a force operating in the mind? Well, Gentlemen, that
is a very simple matter. Let me remind you of one of the very
first objections that were brought up against psycho-analysis.
It was said then that it was occupied in finding a purely psycho­
logical theory of neurotic phenomena and this was quite hope­
less, since psychological theories could never explain an illness.
People had chosen to forget that the sexual function is not a
1 [No doubt an allusion to the subject of narcissism, which is discussed
in Lecture XXVI.]

I
]'
I
_

i

388

.

;
i
i ।
'
j ■

i <
■■
'j
IJ
I I,

:
,
<
i
’

■
'
>
■

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

purely psychical thing any more than it is a purely somatic one.
It influences bodily and mental life alike. If in the symptoms of
the psychoneuroses we have become acquainted with mani­
festations of disturbances in the psychical operation of the sexual
function, we shall not be surprised to find in the ‘actual’
neuroses the direct somatic consequences of sexual disturbances.
Clinical medicine has given us a valuable pointer towards an
interpretation of these disturbances, and one that has been
taken into account by various enquirers. The ‘actual’ neuroses,
in the details of their symptoms and also in their characteristic
of influencing every organic system and every function, exhibit
an unmistakable resemblance to the pathological states which
arise from the chronic influence of external toxic substances and
from a sudden withdrawal of them—to intoxications and con­
ditions of abstinence. The two groups of disorders are brought
together still more closely by intermediate conditions such as
Grave’s disease which we have learnt to recognize as equally
due to the operation of toxic substances, but of toxins which are
not introduced into the body from outside but originate in the
subject’s own metabolism. In view of these analogies, we cannot,
I think, avoid regarding the neuroses as results of disturbances
in the sexual metabolism, whether because more of these sexual
toxins is produced than the subject can deal with, or whether
because internal and even psychical conditions restrict the
proper employment of these substances. The popular mind has
from time immemorial paid homage to hypotheses of this kind
on the nature of sexual desire, speaking of love as an ‘intoxication’ and believing that falling in love is brought about by lovephiltres—though here the operative agent is to some extent
externalized. And for us this would be an occasion for recalling
the erotogenic zones and our assertion that sexual excitation
can be generated in the most various organs [p. 324]. But for
the rest the phrase ‘sexual metabolism’ or ‘chemistry of sexuality’ is a term without content; we know nothing about it and
cannot even decide whether we are to assume two sexual sub­
stances, which would then be named ‘male’ and ‘female’,1 or
whether we could be satisfied with one sexual toxin which we
should have to recognize as the vehicle of all the stimulant
1 [Elsewhere, e.g. in the New Introductory Lectures (1933a), ibid., 22,
131, Freud strongly rejects such a notion.]

XXIV. THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE

389

effects of the libido. The theoretical structure of psycho-analysis
that we have created is in truth a superstructure, which will one
day have to be set upon its organic foundation. But we are still
ignorant of this.
What characterizes psycho-analysis as a science is not the
material which it handles but the technique with which it
works. It can be applied to the history of civilization, to the
science of religion and to mythology, no less than to the theory
of the neuroses, without doing violence to its essential nature.
What it aims at and achieves is nothing other than the uncovering of what is unconscious in mental life. The problems of
the ‘actual’ neuroses, whose symptoms are probably generated
by direct toxic damage, offer psycho-analysis no points of
attack. It can do little towards throwing light on them and
must leave the task to biologico-medical research.
And now perhaps you understand better why I did not choose
to arrange my material differently. If I had promised you an
‘Introduction to the Theory of the Neuroses’ the correct path
would certainly have led from the simple forms of the ‘actual’
neuroses to the more complicated psychical illnesses due to dis­
turbance of the libido. As regards the former I should have had
to collect from various sources what we have learnt or believe
we know, and in connection with the psychoneuroses psycho­
analysis would have come up for discussion as the most important technical aid in throwing light on those conditions. But
what I intended to give and what I announced was an ‘Intro­
duction to Psycho-Analysis’. It was more important for me that
you should gain an idea of psycho-analysis than that you
should obtain some pieces of knowledge about the neuroses;
and for that reason the ‘actual’ neuroses, unproductive so far
as psycho-analysis is concerned, could no longer have a place
in the foreground. I believe, too, that I have made the better
choice for you. For, on account of the profundity of its hy­
potheses and the comprehensiveness of its connections, psycho­
analysis deserves a place in the interest of every educated
person, while the theory of the neuroses is a chapter in medicine
like any other.
Nevertheless you will rightly expect that we should devote
some interest to the ‘actual’ neuroses as well. Their intimate

■

1

■
1
'
■
•'

'
>

I
]
'
i

i
ji

ij
II!

390

,
1
।
I
■

;
(1
,
;]
।
■
'

(
ii
i
'
.
।

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

clinical connection with the psychoneuroses would alone compel
us to do so. I may inform you, then, that we distinguish three
pure forms of ‘actual’ neuroses: neurasthenia, anxiety neurosis
and hypochondria.1 Even this assertion is not uncontradicted.
All the names are in use, it is true, but their content is indefinite
and fluctuating. There are even doctors who oppose any
dividing lines in the chaotic world of neurotic phenomena, any
segregation of clinical entities or individual diseases, and who
do not even recognize the distinction between the ‘actual’
neuroses and the psychoneuroses. I think they are going too far
and have not chosen the path which leads to progress. The
forms of neurosis which I have mentioned occur occasionally in
their pure form; more often, however, they are intermixed with
each other and with a psychoneurotic disorder. This need not
lead us to abandon the distinction between them. Consider the
difference between the study of minerals and of rocks in minera­
logy. The minerals are described as individuals, no doubt on
the basis of the fact that they often occur as crystals, sharply
separated from their environment. Rocks consist of aggregations of minerals, which, we may be sure, have not come to­
gether by chance but as a result of what determined their
origin. In the theory of the neuroses we still know too little of
the course of their development to produce anything resembling
petrology. But we are certainly doing the right thing if we start
by isolating from the mass the individual clinical entities which
we recognize and which are comparable to the minerals.
A noteworthy relation between the symptoms of the ‘actual’
neuroses and of the psychoneuroses makes a further important
contribution to our knowledge of the formation of symptoms in
the latter. For a symptom of an ‘actual’ neurosis is often the
nucleus and first stage of a psychoneurotic symptom. A relation
of this kind can be most clearly observed between neurasthenia
and the transference neurosis known as ‘conversion hysteria’,
between anxiety neurosis and anxiety hysteria, but also between hypochondria and the forms of disorder which will be
mentioned later [p. 423 ff.] under the name of paraphrenia
(dementia praecox and paranoia). Let us take as an example a
1 [A discussion of hypochondria as a third ‘actual* neurosis appears
in Section II of Freud’s paper on ‘Narcissism’ (1914c), Standard Ed., 14,
83 ff.]

XXIV. THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE

391

case of hysterical headache or lumbar pain. Analysis shows us
that, by condensation and displacement, it has become a sub­
stitutive satisfaction for a whole number of libidinal phantasies
or memories. But this pain was also at one time a real one and
it was then a direct sexual-toxic symptom, the somatic expres­
sion of a libidinal excitation. We are far from asserting that all
hysterical symptoms contain a nucleus of this kind. But it re­
mains a fact that this is especially often the case and that what­
ever somatic influences (whether normal or pathological) are
brought about by libidinal excitation are preferred for the con­
struction of hysterical symptoms. In such cases they play the
part of the grain of sand which a mollusc coats with layers
of mother-of-pearl. In the same way, the passing indications
of sexual excitement which accompany the sexual act are
employed by the psychoneurosis as the most convenient and
appropriate material for the construction of symptoms.
A similar course of events affords peculiar diagnostic and
therapeutic interest. It not at all infrequently happens in the
case of a person who is disposed to a neurosis without actually
suffering from a manifest one, that a pathological somatic
change (through inflammation or injury perhaps) sets the
activity of symptom-formation going; so that this activity
hastily turns the symptom which has been presented to it by
reality into the representative of all the unconscious phantasies
which have only been lying in wait to seize hold of some means
of expression. In such a case the physician will adopt sometimes
one and sometimes another line of treatment. He will either
endeavour to remove the organic basis, without bothering
about its noisy neurotic elaboration; or he will attack the
neurosis which has taken this favourable opportunity for arising
and will pay little attention to its organic precipitating cause.
The outcome will prove the one or the other line of approach
right or wrong; it is impossible to make general recommenda­
tions to meet such mixed cases.1
1 [It will be clear from what Freud says in this lecture that the
aetiology of the ‘actual’ neuroses and the distinction between them and
the psychoneuroses were established by him at a very early date. The
term appears first in a paper on ‘Sexuality in the Aetiology of the
Neuroses’ (1898a), Standard Ed., 3, 279, though the notion goes back at
least to 1895. A full list of references is given in an Editor’s footnote to
the paper on ‘ “Wild” Psycho-Analysis’ (1910A), ibid., 11, 224.]

J

LECTURE XXV

;

ANXIETY1
.

l
1

.
11
!
I
I
11

'

J

.

।
I
"
i ,
I
।
’
.
1
,
‘

.
J

Ladies and Gentlemen,—What I said to you in my last lecture
about the general2 neurotic state will no doubt have struck you
as the most incomplete and inadequate of all my pronounce­
ments. I know that is true, and nothing will have surprised you
more, I expect, than that there was nothing in it about anxiety,®
of which most neurotics complain, which they themselves
describe as their worst suffering and which does in fact attain
enormous intensity in them and may result in their adopting
the craziest measures. But there at least I had no intention of
giving you short measure. On the contrary, it was my intention
to attack the problem of anxiety in neurotics particularly keenly
and to discuss it at length with you.
I have no need to introduce anxiety itself to you. Every one
of us has experienced that sensation, or, to speak more correctly,
1 [The problem of anxiety occupied Freud’s mind throughout his life
and his views on it went through a number of changes. His first major
discussion of it was in his two early papers on anxiety neurosis (18956
andf); his last major discussion of it was in Inhibitions, Symptoms and
Anxiety (1926J). In an Editor’s Introduction to the latter some account
will be found of the development of his views (Standard Ed., 20, 78 ff.).
It should be borne in mind that what he says in the present lecture was
subjected later to some important—in one case, fundamental—revisions;
these changes were summarized by him in Addendum A to Inhibitions,
Symptoms and Anxiety, ibid., 20, 157-64. At a still later date, in Lecture
XXXII of his New Introductory Lectures (1933a), he restated his final
position in a particularly clear form. It must be remembered, however,
that, as Freud himself indicates in his Preface (pp. 9-10), the present
lecture was his most complete treatment of the subject at the time of
its delivery.]
2 [‘Allgemeine’ in the original. Throughout the last lecture Freud had
used the word ‘gemeine’ (‘common’).]
3 [‘Angst.’ Some remarks on the English rendering of this word will
be found in an Editor’s Appendix to Freud’s first paper on anxiety
neurosis (Standard Ed., 3, 116). Though ‘anxiety’, in a sense quite
different from the colloquial one, is the technical translation, we often
find it necessary to render it by such words as ‘fear’, being ‘frightened’
or ‘afraid’, and so on.]
392

I

XXV. ANXIETY

393

that affective state, at one time or other on our own account.
But I think the question has never been seriously enough raised
of why neurotics in particular suffer from anxiety so much more
and so much more strongly than other people. Perhaps it has
been regarded as something self-evident: the words ‘nervbs’ and
‘angstlich’1 are commonly used interchangeably, as though they
meant the same thing. But we have no right to do so: there are
‘angstlich’ people who are otherwise not at all ‘nervos’ and, more­
over, ‘nervbs’ people who suffer from many symptoms, among
which a tendency to ‘Angst’ is not included.
However that may be, there is no question that the problem
of anxiety is a nodal point at which the most various and im­
portant questions converge, a riddle whose solution would be
bound to throw a flood of light on our whole mental existence.
I will not assert that I can give you this complete solution; but
you will certainly expect psycho-analysis to approach this sub­
ject too in quite a different way from academic medicine.
Interest there seems mainly to be centred on tracing the
anatomical paths along which the state of anxiety is brought
about. We are told that the medulla oblongata is stimulated,
and the patient learns that he is suffering from a neurosis of the
vagus nerve. The medulla oblongata is a very serious and lovely
object. I remember quite clearly how much time and trouble I
devoted to its study many years ago. To-day, however, I must
remark that I know nothing that could be of less interest to me
for the psychological understanding of anxiety than a knowledge
of the path of the nerves along which its excitations pass.2

It is possible at the start to work upon the subject of anxiety
for quite a time without thinking at all of neurotic states. You
will understand me at once when I describe this kind of anxiety
as ‘realistic’ anxiety in contrast to ‘neurotic’ anxiety. Realistic
anxiety strikes us as something very rational and intelligible.
1 [These words are by no means equivalent to the colloquial English
‘nervous’ and ‘anxious’. ‘Nemos' might be rendered by ‘nervy’ or ‘jumpy’
and ‘angstlich’ by ‘nervous’ in its colloquial sense. ‘Anxious’ in its
ordinary usage is more like the German ‘bekilmmert’ or ‘besorgt’.']
2 [At the age of about thirty Freud had worked for two years at the
histology of the medulla oblongata and published three papers on the
subject: 1885rf, 18866 and 1886c. His own abstracts of these are included
in Standard Ed., 3, 234, 237 and 238.]

,

394

,

;
,

i

i
I
।
।
i
1

'

11
i
i| |
।
I.
।
1;
,
;'

;

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

We may say of it that it is a reaction to the perception of an
external danger—that is, of an injury which is expected and
foreseen. It is connected with the flight reflex and it may be
regarded as a manifestation of the self-preservative instinct. On
what occasions anxiety appears—that is to say, in the face of
what objects and in what situations—will of course depend to a
large extent on the state of a person’s knowledge and on his
sense of power vis-d-vis the external world. We can quite under­
stand how a savage is afraid of a cannon and frightened by an
eclipse of the sun, while a white man, who knows how to
handle the instrument and can foretell the eclipse, remains
without anxiety in these circumstances. On other occasions it is
actually superior knowledge that promotes anxiety, because it
makes an early recognition of the danger possible. Thus the
savage will be terrified at a trail in the jungle that tells an
uninformed person nothing, because it warns him of the proximity of a wild animal; and an experienced sailor will look with
terror at a small cloud in the sky that seems trivial to a pas­
senger, because it tells him of an approaching hurricane.
On further consideration we must tell ourselves that our
judgement that realistic anxiety is rational and expedient calls
for drastic revision. For the only expedient behaviour when a
danger threatens would be a cool estimate of one’s own strength
in comparison with the magnitude of the threat and, on the
basis of that, a decision as to whether flight or defence, or
possibly even attack, offers the best prospect of a successful
issue. But in this situation there is no place at all for anxiety;
everything that happens would be achieved just as well and
probably better if no anxiety were generated. And you can see,
indeed, that if the anxiety is excessively great it proves in the
highest degree inexpedient; it paralyses all action, including
even flight. Usually the reaction to danger consists in a mixture
of the affect of anxiety and defensive action. A terrified animal
is afraid and flees; but the expedient part of this is the ‘flight’
and not the ‘being afraid’.
Thus one feels tempted to assert that the generation of
anxiety is never an expedient thing. It may perhaps help us to
see more clearly if we dissect the situation of anxiety more
carefully. The first thing about it is preparedness for the danger,
which manifests itself in increased sensory attention and motor

XXV. ANXIETY

'
’
•
i
;

'

;
।
■

,

1

I
I
I
|

395

tension. This expectant preparedness can be unhesitatingly
recognized as an advantage; indeed, its absence may be made
responsible for serious consequences. From it there then proceeds
on the one hand motor action—flight in the first instance and at
a higher level active defence—and on the other hand what we
feel as a state of anxiety. The more the generation of anxiety is
limited to a mere abortive beginning—to a signal1—the more
will the preparedness for anxiety transform itself without dis­
turbance into action and the more expedient will be the shape
taken by the whole course of events. Accordingly, the preparedness
for anxiety seems to me to be the expedient element in what we
call anxiety, and the generation of anxiety the inexpedient one.
I shall avoid going more closely into the question of whether
our linguistic usage means the same thing or something clearly
different by ‘Angst [anxiety]’, ‘Furcht [fear]’ and ‘Schreck [fright]’.
I will only say that I think ‘Angst’ relates to the state and dis­
regards the object, while ‘Furcht’ draws attention precisely to
the object. It seems that ‘Schreck’, on the other hand, does have
a special sense; it lays emphasis, that is, on the effect produced
by a danger which is not met by any preparedness for anxiety.
We might say, therefore, that a person protects himself from
fright by anxiety.2
A certain ambiguity and indefiniteness in the use of the word
‘Angst’ will not have escaped you. By ‘anxiety’ we usually
understand the subjective state into which we are put by
perceiving the ‘generation of anxiety’ and we call this an affect.
And what is an affect in the dynamic sense? It is in any case
something highly composite. An affect includes in the first
place particular motor innervations or discharges and secondly
certain feelings; the latter are of two kinds—perceptions of the
motor actions that have occurred and the direct feelings of
pleasure and unpleasure which, as we say, give the affect its
keynote. But I do not think that with this enumeration we have
arrived at the essence of an affect. We seem to see deeper in the
1 [This notion of anxiety serving as a ‘signal’ was to play a central
part in Freud’s later accounts of anxiety, in Inhibitions, Symptoms and
Anxiety (1926rf) and in the New Introductory Lectures (1933a), ibid., 22,
85. It appears again below on p. 405.]
2 [Cf. similar later discussions in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920?),
Standard Ed., 18,12, and in Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety (1926d). ibid.,
20, 164-5.]
s.f.

xvi—c a

il

396

.
I
j
'

’

,
•
■I
■
; ;
!
|
$
( ’
i

1
! ■
I
.
I

I

!|
I
,

1
.
I'

!

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

case of some affects and to recognize that the core which holds
the combination we have described together is the repetition of
some particular significant experience. This experience could
only be a very early impression of a very general nature, placed
in the prehistory not of the individual but of the species. To
make myself more intelligible—an affective state would be
constructed in the same way as a hysterical attack and, like it,
would be the precipitate of a reminiscence. A hysterical attack
may thus be likened to a freshly constructed individual affect,
and a normal affect to the expression of a general hysteria which
has become a heritage.1
Do not suppose that the things I have said to you here about
affects are the recognized stock-in-trade of normal psychology.
They are on the contrary views that have grown up on the soil
of psycho-analysis and are native only to it. What you may
gather about affects from psychology—the James-Lange theory,
for example—is quite beyond understanding or discussion to us
psycho-analysts. But we do not regard our knowledge about
affects as very assured either; it is a first attempt at finding our
bearings in this obscure region. I will proceed, however. We
believe that in the case of the affect of anxiety we know what
the early impression is which it repeats. We believe that it is in
the act of birth that there comes about the combination of un­
pleasurable feelings, impulses of discharge and bodily sensations
which has become the prototype of the effects of a mortal
danger and has ever since been repeated by us as the state of
anxiety. The immense increase of stimulation owing to the
interruption of the renovation of the blood (internal respira­
tion) was at the time the cause of the experience of anxiety;
the first anxiety was thus a toxic one. The name ‘Angst'—
‘angustiae', ‘Enge'2—emphasizes the characteristic of restriction
1 [This account of hysterical attacks had been suggested by Freud in a
paper on that subject many years earlier (1909a), Standard Ed., 9,232-3.
The view of affects in general which is expressed here may possibly be
based on Darwin’s explanation of them as relics of actions which origin­
ally had a meaning (Darwin, 1872)—an explanation quoted from him
by Freud in an early work (1895J), ibid., 2, 181. Freud repeats the
present argument in Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety (1926d). Cf. ibid.,
20, 93, 133 and 84.]
3 [These Latin and German words, meaning ‘narrow place’, ‘straits’,
are from the same root as ‘Angst’ (and ‘anxiety’).]

I

XXV. ANXIETY

|
'
i
■
l

I
|
J

I
I
.

|
■
.

397

in breathing which was then present as a consequence of the real
situation and is now almost invariably reinstated in the affect.
We shall also recognize it as highly relevant that this first state
of anxiety arose out of separation from the mother.1 It is, of
course, our conviction that the disposition to repeat the first
state of anxiety has been so thoroughly incorporated into the
organism through a countless series of generations that a single
individual cannot escape the affect of anxiety even if, like the
legendary Macduff, he ‘was from his mother’s womb untimely
ripped’ and has therefore not himself experienced the act of
birth. We cannot say what has become the prototype of the
state of anxiety in the case of creatures other than mammals.
And in the same way we do not know either what complex of
feelings is in such creatures the equivalent to our anxiety.
It may perhaps interest you to learn how anyone could have
formed such an idea as that the act of birth is the source and
prototype of the affect of anxiety. Speculation had a very small
share in it; what I did, rather, was to borrow from the naive
popular mind. Long years ago, while I was sitting with a
number of other young hospital doctors at our mid-day meal
in an inn, a house physician from the midwifery department
told us of a comic thing that had happened at the last examina­
tion for midwives. A candidate was asked what it meant if
meconium (excreta) made its appearance at birth in the water
coming away, and she promptly replied: ‘it means the child’s
frightened.’ She was laughed at and failed in the examination.
But silently I took her side and began to suspect that this poor
woman from the humbler classes had laid an unerring finger on
an important correlation.2
If we now pass over to consider neurotic anxiety, what fresh
forms and situations are manifested by anxiety in neurotics?

।

]

I

1 [See below, p. 407.]
_ _
’ [The episode must have occurred in the early eighties, and this is
the only record of it. A full history of Freud’s belief in a connection
between anxiety and birth was given in the Editor’s Introduction to
Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, Standard Ed., 20, 84-6. From this it
seemed that the first known reference to it was in a footnote appearing
in the 1909 edition of The Interpretation of Dreams, ibid., 5,400, and prob­
ably written in the summer of 1908. Since the publication of this Intro­
duction, however, an earlier reference has come to light in the Minutes

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

'

398

.
I
।
■
।
t
I
■
■
।
•,
j1
iI
i

There is much to be described here. In the first place we find
a general apprehensiveness, a kind of freely floating anxiety
which is ready to attach itself to any idea that is in any way
suitable, which influences judgement, selects what is to be
expected, and lies in wait for any opportunity that will allow
it to justify itself. We call this state ‘expectant anxiety’ or
‘anxious expectation’. People who are tormented by this kind
of anxiety always foresee the most frightful of all possibilities,
interpret every chance event as a premonition of evil and exploit
every uncertainty in a bad sense. A tendency to an expectation
of evil of this sort is to be found as a character trait in many
people whom one cannot otherwise regard as sick; one calls
them over-anxious or pessimistic. A striking amount of expectant anxiety, however, forms a regular feature of a nervous
disorder to which I have given the name of ‘anxiety neurosis’
and which I include among the ‘actual’ neuroses.1
A second form of anxiety, in contrast to the one I have just
described, is bound psychically2 and attached to particular
objects or situations. This is the anxiety of the extremely multi­
farious and often very strange ‘phobias’. Stanley Hall [1914],
the respected American psychologist, has recently taken the
trouble to present us with a whole series of these phobias in all
the magnificence of Greek names. This sounds like a list of the
ten Plagues of Egypt, though their number goes far beyond
ten.3 Listen to all the things that can become the object or
content of a phobia: darkness, open air, open spaces, cats,

J
[
j '
।
!

;
I
I,
J’
I
■
I
’ '

.
.
’

{
[
■
'

,

of the Vienna Psychoanalytical Society (1962, 1, 179). At a meeting on
April 24, 1907, at which Stekel read a paper on ‘The Psychology and
Pathology of the Anxiety Neurosis’, Adler is reported to have made the
following remark: ‘One need not venture so far as Freud, who sees
anxiety in the process of birth; but anxiety can be traced back into
childhood.’ Neither in Freud’s contribution to the discussion, which was
subsequent to Adler’s, nor in any other, is the matter referred to again.
It would appear from this, however, that Freud’s hypothesis was
familiarly known in the Vienna Society at least a couple of years before
its first publication.]
1 [Cf. Freud’s original account of the anxiety neurosis (18956).]
2 [Instead of being freely floating.]
8 [Actually, Stanley Hall enumerates 132 of them. See a review of
his paper by Ernest Jones (1916). Stanley Hall (1846-1924) was origin­
ally a supporter of Freud’s and it was he who invited Freud to lecture
in America in 1909, though he later became a follower of Adler.]

’

i
I

1

>

i

XXV. ANXIETY

399

spiders, caterpillars, snakes, mice, thunderstorms, sharp points,
blood, enclosed spaces, crowds, solitude, crossing bridges, sea
voyages and railway journeys, etc., etc. A first attempt at find­
ing one’s way about in this confusion suggests a division into
three groups. Some of the dreaded objects and situations have
something uncanny about them for normal people as well, some
relation to danger; and such phobias, therefore, do not strike
us as unintelligible, though their strength is greatly exaggerated.
Thus most of us have a sense of repulsion if we meet with a
snake. Snake phobia, we might say, is a universal human char­
acteristic; and Darwin [1889, 40] has described most im­
pressively how he could not avoid feeling fear of a snake that
struck at him, even though he knew that he was protected from
it by a thick sheet of glass. We may refer to a second group the
cases in which a relation to a danger is still present, though we
are accustomed to minimize the danger and not to anticipate it.
The majority of situation phobias belong to this group. We
know that there is more chance of an accident when we are
on a railway-journey than when we stay at home—the chance
of a collision; we know, too, that a ship may go down, in
which case there is a probability of being drowned; but we do
not think about these dangers, and travel by rail and ship
without anxiety. It cannot be disputed that we should fall into
the river if the bridge collapsed at the moment we were crossing
it; but that happens so exceedingly seldom that it does not arise
as a danger. Solitude, too, has its dangers and in certain
circumstances we avoid it; but there is no question of our not
being able to tolerate it under any condition even for a moment.
Much the same is true of crowds, of enclosed spaces, of thunder­
storms and so on. What in general appears to us strange in these
phobias of neurotics is not so much their content as their
intensity. The anxiety of phobias is positively overwhelming.
And sometimes we get an impression that what neurotics are
afraid of are not at all the same things and situations which
may in certain circumstances cause anxiety in us too and which
they describe by the same names.
We are left with a third group of phobias, which is quite
beyond our comprehension. When a strong, grown-up man is
unable owing to anxiety to walk along a street or cross a square
in his own familiar home-town, when a healthy, well-developed

:i

400
jl
|i
I
I'

i
|
1

I

1
i
I
1
11
;■
I!

[
.
I:

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

woman is thrown into insensate anxiety because a cat has
brushed against the edge of her dress or because a mouse has
run across the room, how are we to relate these things to the
danger which they obviously constitute for the phobic subject?
In the case of such animal phobias there can be no question of
an exaggeration of universal human antipathies, since, as
though to demonstrate the contrary, there are numerous people
who cannot pass by a cat without coaxing it and stroking it.
The mouse that these women are so much afraid of is also [in
German] one of the chief terms of affection; a girl who is
delighted when her lover calls her one will often scream with
terror when she sees the pretty creature which bears that name.
In the case of the man with agoraphobia the only explanation
that we can reach is that he is behaving like a small child. A
child is actually taught as part of his education to avoid such
situations as dangerous; and our agoraphobic will in fact be
saved from his anxiety if we accompany him across the square.
The two forms of anxiety that I have just described—the
freely floating expectant anxiety and the sort which is bound to
phobias—are independent of each other. One is not a higher
stage, as it were, of the other; and they only appear simultane­
ously in exceptional cases and, so to speak, accidentally. The
most powerful general apprehensiveness need not be expressed
in phobias; people whose whole existence is restricted by
agoraphobia may be entirely free from pessimistic expectant
anxiety. Some phobias—for instance, agoraphobia and railway
phobia—are demonstrably acquired at a fairly mature age,
while others—such as fear of darkness, thunderstorms and
animals—seem to have been present from the first. Those of the
former kind have the significance of severe illnesses; the latter
make their appearance rather as eccentricities or whims. If a
person exhibits one of these latter, one may suspect as a rule
that he will have other similar ones. I must add that we class
all these phobias as anxiety hysteria", that is to say, we regard
them as a disorder closely related to the familiar conversion
hysteria1 [p. 390].
1 [Freud’s first long discussion of anxiety hysteria was in the case
history of‘little Hans’ (19093), Standard Ed., 10, 115 ff. Some account of
his changing views on phobias is given in an Editor’s Appendix to his
early paper on ‘Obsessions and Phobias’ (1895c), ibid., 3, 83-4.]

XXV. ANXIETY

401

The third of the forms of neurotic anxiety faces us with the
puzzling fact that here the connection between anxiety and a
threatening danger is completely lost to view. For instance,
anxiety may appear in hysteria as an accompaniment to hysterical symptoms, or in some chance condition of excitement in
which, it is true, we should expect some manifestation of affect
but least of all one of anxiety; or it may make its appearance,
divorced from any determinants and equally incomprehensible
to us and to the patient, as an unrelated attack of anxiety. Here
there is no sign whatever of any danger or of any cause that
could be exaggerated into one. We next learn from these
spontaneous attacks that the complex which we describe as a
state of anxiety is capable of fragmentation. The total attack can
be represented by a single, intensely developed symptom, by a
tremor, a vertigo, by palpitation of the heart, or by dyspnoea;
and the general feeling by which we recognize anxiety may be
absent or have become indistinct. Yet these conditions, which
we describe as ‘anxiety-equivalents’, have to be equated with
anxiety in all clinical and aetiological respects.
Two questions now arise. Can we relate neurotic anxiety, in
which danger plays little or no part, to realistic anxiety, which
is invariably a reaction to danger? And how are we to under­
stand neurotic anxiety? We shall certainly be inclined in the
first instance to hold fast to our expectation that where there is
anxiety there must be something that one is afraid of.
Clinical observation affords us a number of hints towards understanding neurotic anxiety, and I will give you their tenor:—
(a) It is not difficult to establish the fact that expectant
anxiety or general apprehensiveness is closely dependent on
certain happenings in sexual life, or, let us say, certain employ­
ments of the libido. The simplest and most instructive case of
this sort occurs in people who expose themselves to what is
known as unconsummated excitation—that is, people in whom
violent sexual excitations meet with no sufficient discharge,
cannot be brought to a satisfying conclusion—men, for instance,
while they are engaged to be married, and women whose
husbands are insufficiently potent or, as a precaution, perform
the sexual act in an incomplete or curtailed fashion. In such
circumstances the libidinal excitation vanishes and anxiety

|
|

I

'

i
,

|
I!
■,

1
,

1

i
|

i

j
:

\
■;
I
i
■

।

1

i
i

,
[
|
*
’■!
'
.

i

402
GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES
appears in its place whether in the form of expectant anxiety
or in attacks and anxiety-equivalents. Interruption of the sexual
act as a precaution, if it is practised as a sexual regime, is such
a regular cause of anxiety neurosis in men, but more parti­
cularly in women, that in medical practice it is advisable in
such cases to begin by investigating this aetiology. It will then
be found on countless occasions that the anxiety neurosis
disappears when the sexual abuse is discontinued.
The fact of there being a connection between sexual restraint
and anxiety states is, so far as I know, no longer disputed even
by physicians who have no contact with psycho-analysis. But
I can well believe that an attempt is made to reverse the
relation and to put forward the view that the people concerned
are such as are already inclined to apprehensiveness and for
that reason practise restraint in sexual matters as well. This,
however, is decisively contradicted by the behaviour of women,
whose sexual activity is essentially of a passive nature—is determined, that is to say, by their treatment by the man. The more
passionate a woman is—the more inclined, therefore, to sexual
intercourse and the more capable of being satisfied—the more
certain she is to react with manifestations of anxiety to a man’s
impotence or to coitus interruptus, whereas in the case of
anaesthetic women or those without much libido such illtreatment plays a far smaller part.
Of course, the sexual abstinence now so warmly recom­
mended by doctors only has the same importance in generating
anxiety states when the libido which is prevented from finding
a satisfying discharge is correspondingly strong and has not
been dealt with for the greater part by sublimation. Indeed, the
decision on whether the outcome is to be illness or not always
lies with quantitative factors. Even where what is in question
is not illness but the form assumed by a person’s character, it
is easy to recognize that sexual restriction goes hand in hand
with some kind of anxiousness and hesitancy, while intrepidity
and impudent daring bring along with them a free indulgence
of sexual needs. However much these relations are altered and
complicated by a variety of cultural influences, it nevertheless
remains true of the average of mankind that anxiety has a close
connection with sexual limitation.
I am far from having told you of all the observations that

XXV. ANXIETY

403

speak in favour of the genetic relation I have asserted to exist
between libido and anxiety. Among them, for instance, is the
influence on anxiety disorders of certain phases of life to which,
as in the case of puberty and the time of the menopause, a con­
siderable increase in the production of libido may be attributed.
In some states of excitement, too, it is possible to observe
directly a mixture of libido and anxiety and the final replacement of libido by anxiety. The impression one gains from all
these facts is twofold: first, that what is in question is an
accumulation of libido which is kept away from its normal
employment, and secondly, that here we are entirely in the
sphere of somatic processes. How anxiety arises from libido is
not at first discernible; we can only recognize that libido is
absent and that anxiety is observed in its place.1
(6) A second pointer is to be found in the analysis of the
psychoneuroses, and especially of hysteria. We have seen that
in this illness anxiety often appears in company with the symp­
toms, but that unbound anxiety appears, too, manifested as an
attack or as a chronic condition. The patients cannot say what
it is they are afraid of, and, by the help of an unmistakable
secondary revision [p. 182], link it to the first phobias that come
to hand—such as dying, going mad, or having a stroke. If the
situation out of which the anxiety (or the symptoms accom­
panied by anxiety) arose is subjected to analysis, we can as a
rule discover what normal course of psychical events has failed
to occur and has been replaced by phenomena of anxiety. To
express it in another way: we construct the unconscious process
as it would have been if it had not experienced any repression
and had proceeded unhindered into consciousness. [Pp. 293-4.]
This process would have been accompanied by a particular
affect, and we now learn to our surprise that this affect accom­
panying the normal course of events is invariably replaced by
anxiety after repression has occurred, no matter what its own
quality may be. Thus, when we have a hysterical anxiety-state
before us, its unconscious correlate may be an impulse of a
similar character—anxiety, shame, embarrassment—or, just as
easily, a positive libidinal excitation or a hostile aggressive one,
such as rage or anger. Anxiety is therefore the universally
1 [The last four paragraphs are to a large extent a summary of
Freud’s first paper on anxiety neurosis (18954).]

,
J
|
i
J
‘
|
1

j

I

J
i
i

।
(

404

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

current coinage for which any affective impulse is or can be
exchanged if the ideational content attached to it is subjected
to repression.1
(c) We make a third discovery when we come to patients
suffering from obsessional actions, who seem in a remarkable
way exempt from anxiety. If we try to hinder their carrying out
of their obsessional action—their washing or their ceremonial—
or if they themselves venture upon an attempt to give up one of
their compulsions, they are forced by the most terrible anxiety
to yield to the compulsion. We can see that the anxiety was
screened by the obsessional action, and that the latter was only
performed in order to avoid the anxiety. In an obsessional
neurosis, therefore, anxiety which would otherwise inevitably
set in is replaced by the formation of a symptom, and if we
turn to hysteria we find a similar relation: the result of the
process of repression is either a generating of anxiety pure and
simple, or anxiety accompanied by the formation of a symptom,
or a more complete formation of a symptom without anxiety.
It would thus seem not to be wrong in an abstract sense to
assert that in general symptoms are only formed to escape an
otherwise unavoidable generating of anxiety. If we adopt this
view, anxiety is placed, as it were, in the very centre of our
interest in the problems of neurosis.

Our observations on anxiety neurosis led us to conclude that
the deflection of the libido from its normal employment, which
causes the development of anxiety, takes place in the region of
somatic processes [p. 403]. Analyses of hysteria and obsessional
neurosis yield the additional conclusion that a similar deflection
with the same outcome may also be the result of a refusal on
the part of the psychical agencies. This much, therefore, we
know about the origin of neurotic anxiety. It still sounds fairly
indefinite; but for the moment I see no path that would lead
us further. The second problem we set ourselves—of establish­
ing a connection between neurotic anxiety, which is libido put
to an abnormal employment, and realistic anxiety, which
corresponds to a reaction to danger—seems even harder to
solve. One might suppose that these were two quite disparate
1 [See the metapsychological paper on ‘Repression’ (1915d), Standard
Ed., 14, 152 ff.]

XXV. ANXIETY

405

things; and yet we have no means of distinguishing in our
feelings between realistic anxiety and neurotic anxiety.
We finally arrive at the connection we are in search of, if
we take as our starting-point the opposition we have so often
asserted between the ego and the libido. As we know, the
generation of anxiety is the ego’s reaction to danger and the
signal for taking flight. [Cf. p. 395.] If so, it seems plausible to
suppose that in neurotic anxiety the ego is making a similar
attempt at flight from the demand by its libido, that it is treat­
ing this internal danger as though it were an external one. This
would therefore fulfil our expectation [p. 401] that where
anxiety is shown there is something one is afraid of. But the
analogy could be carried further. Just as the attempt at flight
from an external danger is replaced by standing firm and the
adoption of expedient measures of defence, so too the generation
of neurotic anxiety gives place to the formation of symptoms,
which results in the anxiety being bound.
The difficulty in understanding now lies elsewhere. The
anxiety which signifies a flight of the ego from its libido is after
all supposed to be derived from that libido itself. This is obscure
and it reminds us not to forget that after all a person’s libido is
fundamentally something of his and cannot be contrasted with
him as something external. It is the topographical dynamics of
the generation of anxiety which are still obscure to us—the
question of what mental energies are produced in that process
and from what mental systems they derive. This is once more
a question which I cannot promise to answer: but there are
two other tracks which we must not fail to follow and in doing
so we shall once more be making use of direct observation and
analytic enquiry as a help to our speculations. We will turn to
the genesis of anxiety in children and to the source of the
neurotic anxiety which is attached to phobias.
Apprehensiveness in children is something very usual, and it
seems most difficult to distinguish whether it is neurotic or
realistic anxiety. Indeed the value of making the distinction is
put in question by the behaviour of children. For on the one
hand we are not surprised if a child is frightened of all strangers,
or of new situations and things; and we account for this reaction
very easily as being due to his weakness and ignorance. Thus

,
।

।
j

।
|

J
'
!

t

406

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

we attribute to children a strong inclination to realistic anxiety
and we should regard it as quite an expedient arrangement if
this apprehensiveness were an innate heritage in them. Children
would merely be repeating in this the behaviour of prehistoric
men and of modern primitive peoples who as a result of their
ignorance and helplessness are afraid of every novelty and of
many familiar things which no longer cause us any anxiety
to-day. And it would fit in perfectly with our expectation if
children’s phobias, in part at least, were the same as those
which we may attribute to the primaeval periods of human
development.
On the other hand we cannot overlook the fact that not all
children are anxious to the same degree, and that precisely
children who exhibit a special timidity towards objects and in
situations of every kind turn out later to be neurotic. Thus the
neurotic disposition betrays itself also by an outspoken tendency
to realistic anxiety; apprehensiveness appears to be the primary
thing and we reach the conclusion that the reason why children
and, later, growing youths and girls are afraid of the height of
their libido is because in fact they are afraid of everything. The
genesis of anxiety from libido would in this way be denied; and
if one examined into the determinants of realistic anxiety,
consistency would lead one to the view that consciousness of
one’s own weakness and helplessness—inferiority, according to
Adler’s terminology,—if it can be prolonged from childhood
into adult life, is the final basis of neuroses.
This sounds so simple and seductive that it has a claim on
our attention. It is true that it would involve a displacement of
the riddle of the neurotic state. The continued existence of the
sense of inferiority—and thus, of what determines anxiety and
the formation of symptoms—seems so well assured that what
calls for an explanation is rather how, as an exception, what
we know as health can come about. But what is revealed by a
careful examination of apprehensiveness in children? At the
very beginning, what children are afraid of is strange people',
situations only become important because they include people,
and impersonal things do not come into account at all until
later. But a child is not afraid of these strangers because he
attributes evil intentions to them and compares his weakness
with their strength, and accordingly assesses them as dangers

t'

XXV. ANXIETY

407

to his existence, safety and freedom from pain. A child who is
mistrustful in this way and terrified of the aggressive instinct
which dominates the world is a theoretical construction that has
quite miscarried. A child is frightened of a strange face because
he is adjusted to the sight of a familiar and beloved figure—
ultimately of his mother. It is his disappointment and longing
that are transformed into anxiety—his libido, in fact, which
has become unemployable, which cannot at that time be held
in suspense and is discharged as anxiety. And it can scarcely
be a matter of chance, either, that in this situation which is
the prototype of the anxiety of children there is a repetition of
the determinant of the first state of anxiety during the act of
birth—namely, separation from the mother.1
In children the first phobias relating to situations are those of
darkness and solitude. The former of these often persists
throughout life; both are involved when a child feels the
absence of some loved person who looks after it—its mother,
that is to say. While I was in the next room, I heard a
child who was afraid of the dark call out: ‘Do speak to me,
Auntie! I’m frightened!’ ‘Why, what good would that do? You
can’t see me.’ To this the child replied: ‘If someone speaks, it
gets lighter.’1
2 Thus a longing felt in the dark is transformed into
a fear of the dark. Far from its being the case that neurotic
anxiety is only secondary and a special case of realistic anxiety,
we see on the contrary that in a small child something that
behaves like realistic anxiety shares its essential feature—origin
from unemployed libido—with neurotic anxiety. Innately,
children seem to have little true realistic anxiety. In all the
situations which can later become determinants of phobias (on
heights, on narrow bridges over water, on railway journeys, on
ships) children exhibit no anxiety; and, to be sure, the greater
1 [This was Freud’s first explicit insistence on the primary importance
of separation from the mother as a factor in the origin of anxiety, though
it had been suggested above (p. 397) and implied in earlier writings.
References to these will be found in the Editor’s Introduction to
Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety (1926d) Standard Ed., 20, 82. In the latter
work the matter was discussed at greater length (ibid., 136-8 and 151).
It had also been briefly mentioned in The Ego and the Id (19236), ibid.,
19, 58.]
2 [This anecdote had appeared (in a slightly different form) in a foot­
note to the third of Freud’s Three Essays (1905<f), Standard Ed., 7,224 «.]

I

408

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

their ignorance the less their anxiety. It would have been a very
good thing if they had inherited more of such life-preserving
instincts,1 for that would have greatly facilitated the task of
watching over them to prevent their running into one danger
after another. The fact is that children, to begin with, over­
estimate their strength and behave fearlessly because they are
ignorant of dangers. They will run along the brink of the water,
climb on to the window-sill, play with sharp objects and with
fire—in short, do everything that is bound to damage them and
to worry those in charge of them. When in the end realistic
anxiety is awakened in them, that is wholly the result of educa­
tion; for they cannot be allowed to make the instructive
experiences themselves.
If, then, there are children who come some way to meet this
education in anxiety, and who go on to find dangers themselves
that they have not been warned against, this is sufficiently
explained by the fact that they have a greater amount of innate
libidinal need in their constitution or have been prematurely
spoiled by libidinal satisfaction. It is not to be wondered at if
such children include, too, the later neurotics: as we know,
what most facilitates the development of a neurosis is an in­
capacity to tolerate a considerable damming-up of libido over
any great length of time. You will observe that here once more
the constitutional factor comes into its rights—and these, in­
deed, we have never sought to dispute. We are only on our
guard against those who in its favour neglect all other claims,
and who introduce the constitutional factor at points at which
the combined results of observation and analysis show that it
does not belong or must take the last place.
Let me sum up what we have learnt from our observations of
the apprehensiveness of children. Infantile anxiety has very
little to do with realistic anxiety, but, on the other hand, is
closely related to the neurotic anxiety of adults. Like the latter,
it is derived from unemployed libido and it replaces the missing
love-object by an external object or by a situation.
You will be glad to hear that the analysis of phobias has not
much more that is new to teach us. For the same thing happens
1 [This is one of the extremely few occasions on which Freud uses the
word ‘Instinkt' instead of his usual ‘Trzei’.]

XXV. ANXIETY

409

with them as with children’s anxiety: unemployable libido is
being constantly transformed into an apparently realistic
anxiety and thus a tiny external danger is introduced to repre­
sent the claims of the libido. There is nothing to be wondered
at in this agreement [between phobias and children’s anxiety],
for the infantile phobias are not only the prototype of the later
ones which we class as ‘anxiety hysteria’ but are actually their
precondition and the prelude to them. Every hysterical phobia
goes back to an infantile anxiety and is a continuation of it,
even if it has a different content and must thus be given another
name. The difference between the two disorders lies in their
mechanism. In order that libido shall be changed into anxiety,
, it no longer suffices in the case of adults for the libido to have
become momentarily unemployable in the form of a longing.
Adults have long since learnt how to hold such libido in suspense
or to employ it in some other way. If, however, the libido
belongs to a psychical impulse which has been subjected to
repression, then circumstances are re-established similar to those
in the case of a child in whom there is still no distinction
between conscious and unconscious; and by means of regression
to the infantile phobia a passage is opened, as it were, through
which the transformation of libido into anxiety can be comfort­
ably accomplished.
As you will recall, we have dealt with repression at great
length,1 but in doing so we have always followed the vicissitudes
only of the idea that is to be repressed—naturally, since this was
easier to recognize and describe. We have always left on one
side the question of what happens to the affect that was
attached to the repressed idea; and it is only now that we learn
[p. 403] that the immediate vicissitude of that affect is to be
transformed into anxiety, whatever quality it may have ex­
hibited apart from this in the normal course of events. This
transformation of affect is, however, by far the more important
part of the process of repression. It is not so easy to speak of this,
since we cannot assert the existence of unconscious affects in
the same sense as that of unconscious ideas.1
2 An idea remains
1 [In Lecture XIX.]
2 [For more information on what follows, see the third section of the
metapsychological paper on ‘The Unconscious’ (1915e), Standard Ed.,
14, 177-8, and The Ego and the Id (19236), ibid., 19, 22-3.]

I
I
!

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

'

410

i

the same, except for the one difference, whether it is conscious
or unconscious; we can state what it is that corresponds to an
unconscious idea. But an affect is a process of discharge and
must be judged quite differently from an idea; what corresponds
to it in the unconscious cannot be declared without deeper
reflection and a clarification of our hypotheses about psychical
processes. And that we cannot undertake here. We will, how­
ever, emphasize the impression we have now gained that the
generation of anxiety is intimately linked to the system of the
unconscious.
I have said that transformation into anxiety—it would be
better to say discharge in the form of anxiety—is the immediate
vicissitude of libido which is subjected to repression. I must add
that that vicissitude is not the only or the definitive one. In the
neuroses processes are in action which endeavour to bind this
generating of anxiety and which even succeed in doing so in
various ways. In phobias, for instance, two phases of the
neurotic process can be clearly distinguished. The first is concerned with repression and the changing of libido into anxiety,
which is then bound to an external danger. The second consists
in the erection of all the precautions and guarantees by means
of which any contact can be avoided with this danger, treated
as it is like an external thing. Repression corresponds to an
attempt at flight by the ego from libido which is felt as a danger.
A phobia may be compared to an entrenchment against an
external danger which now represents the dreaded libido. The
weakness of the defensive system in phobias lies, of course, in the
fact that the fortress which has been so greatly strengthened
towards the outside remains assailable from within. A projec­
tion outwards of the danger of libido can never succeed
thoroughly.1 For that reason, in other neuroses other systems of
defence are in use against the possible generation of anxiety.
That is a most interesting part of the psychology of the neuroses;
but unluckily it would lead us too far and it presupposes a
deeper specialized knowledge. I will only add one thing more.
I have already spoken to you [p. 360] of the ‘anticathexis’
which is employed by the ego in the process of repression and

I

:

!
iI
!'

'
1
t

1

■
,

.
'

1 [More technical accounts of the structure of phobias will be found
in ‘Repression’ (1915rf), Standard Ed., 14, 155, and ‘The Unconscious’
(1915«), ibid., 182-4.]

XXV. ANXIETY

411

which must be permanently maintained in order that the re­
pression may have stability. This anticathexis has the task of
carrying through the various forms of defence against the
generating of anxiety after repression.
Let us return to the phobias. I can safely say that you now
see how inadequate it is merely to seek to explain their content,
to take no interest in anything but how it comes about that this
or that object or some particular situation or other has been
made into the object of the phobia. The content of a phobia
has just about as much importance in relation to it as the
manifest facade of a dream has in relation to the dream. It must
be admitted, subject to the necessary qualifications, that among
the contents of phobias there are a number which, as Stanley
Hall [1914, see p. 398] insists, are adapted to serve as objects
of anxiety owing to phylogenetic inheritance. It tallies with this,
indeed, that many of these anxiety-objects can only establish
their connection with danger by a symbolic tie.
We thus find ourselves convinced that the problem of anxiety
occupies a place in the question of the psychology of the
neuroses which may rightly be described as central. We have
received a strong impression of the way in which the generation
of anxiety is linked to the vicissitudes of the libido and the
system of the unconscious. There is only a single point that
we have found disconnected—a gap in our views: the single,
yet scarcely disputable, fact that realistic anxiety must be
regarded as a manifestation of the ego’s self-preservative
instincts.1
1 [This difficulty is met at the end of the next lecture, p. 430.]

S.F. xvi—D D

I
i

LECTURE XXVI

THE LIBIDO THEORY AND
NARCISSISM
Ladies and Gentlemen,—We have repeatedly (and only
recently once again [p. 350]) had to deal with the distinction
between the ego-instincts and the sexual instincts. In the first
place, repression showed us that the two can come into opposi­
tion to each other, that the sexual instincts are then ostensibly
subdued and are obliged to find satisfaction for themselves along
regressive and roundabout paths, and that in doing so they
are able to find compensation for their defeat in their in­
domitability. We next learnt that the two kinds of instincts
are from the first differently related to Necessity the educator
[p. 355], so that their course of development is not the same
and they do not enter into the same connection with the reality
principle. Lastly, we seem to have found that the sexual
instincts are linked by much closer bonds than the ego­
instincts to the affective state of anxiety—a conclusion which
seems incomplete in only one important respect. In order to
establish it more firmly, therefore, I will bring forward the
further noteworthy fact that if hunger and thirst (the two
most elementary self-preservative instincts) are unsatisfied,
the result is never their transformation into anxiety, whereas
the changing of unsatisfied libido into anxiety is, as we have
seen, among the best known and most frequently observed of
phenomena.
Our right to separate the ego-instincts from the sexual ones
cannot, no doubt, be shaken: it is implied in the existence of
sexual life as a distinct activity of the individual. The only
question is what importance we attribute to this separation,
how deep-going we wish to consider it. The answer to this
question, however, will be guided by how far we are able to
establish the extent to which the sexual instincts behave differ­
ently in their somatic and mental manifestations from the others
which we are contrasting with them, and how important the
consequences are which arise from those differences. Moreover,
412

XXVI. LIBIDO THEORY AND NARCISSISM

413

we have, of course, no motive for asserting an essential difference
between the two groups of instincts which is not plainly appreci­
able. Both of them come before us merely as designations of
sources of energy in the individual, and the discussion as to
whether they are fundamentally one or essentially different and
as to when, if they are one, they became separate from each
other—this discussion cannot be conducted on the basis of the
connotation of the terms but must keep to the biological facts
lying behind them. At the moment we know too little about
these, and even if we knew more it would have no relevance
for our analytic task.
It is obvious, too, that we shall profit very little if, following
Jung’s example, we insist upon the original unity of all the
instincts and give the name of ‘libido’ to the energy manifested
in all of them. Since no device whatever will make it possible
to eliminate the sexual function from mental life, we shall in
that case find ourselves obliged to speak of sexual and asexual
libido. But the name of libido is properly reserved for the
instinctual forces of sexual life, as has hitherto been our
practice.
In my opinion, therefore, the question of how far we are to
carry the undoubtedly justifiable separation between the sexual
and self-preservative instincts is not of much importance for
psycho-analysis. Nor is psycho-analysis competent to answer the
question. Biology, however, offers a number of suggestive
possibilities which speak in favour of the distinction having
some importance. Sexuality is, indeed, the single function of
the living organism which extends beyond the individual and is
concerned with his relation to the species. It is an unmistakable
fact that it does not always, like the individual organism’s other
functions, bring it advantages, but, in return for an unusually
high degree of pleasure, brings dangers which threaten the
individual’s life and often enough destroy it. It is probable, too,
that quite special metabolic processes are necessary, differing
from all others, in order to maintain a portion of the individual
life as a disposition for its descendants. And finally, the in­
dividual organism, which regards itself as the main thing and
its sexuality as a means, like any other, for its own satisfaction,
is from the point of view of biology only an episode in a suc­
cession of generations, a short-lived appendage to a germ-plasm

414

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

endowed with virtual immortality—like the temporary holder
of an entail which will outlast him.1
The psycho-analytic explanation of the neuroses does not,
however, call for such far-ranging considerations. The separate
following-up of the sexual and ego-instincts has helped us to
find the key to an understanding of the group of transference
neuroses. We have been able to trace them back to the basic
situation in which the sexual instincts have come into a dispute
with the self-preservative instincts, or, to put it in biological
(though less precise) terms, a situation in which one aspect of
the ego, as an independent individual organism, comes into
conflict with its other aspect, as a member of a succession of
generations. A dissension of this kind may perhaps only occur
in human beings, and on that account neurosis may, generally
speaking, constitute their prerogative over the animals. The
excessive development of their libido and—what is perhaps
made possible precisely by that—their development of a richly
articulated mental life seem to have created the determinants
for the occurrence of such a conflict. It is at once obvious that
these are also the determinants for the great advances that
human beings have made beyond what they have in common
with the animals; so that their susceptibility to neurosis would
only be the reverse side of their other endowments. But these too
are only speculations, which are diverting us from our
immediate task.
Hitherto it has been a premiss of our work that we can
distinguish the ego-instincts from the sexual ones by their
manifestations. With the transference neuroses this could be
done without difficulty. We termed the cathexes of energy
which the ego directs towards the objects of its sexual desires
‘libido’; all the others, which are sent out by the self-preservative
instincts, we termed ‘interest’.2 By tracing the course of the
1 [Freud developed this biological argument further in Beyond the
Pleasure Principle (1920g), particularly in Chapter VI.]
8 [The term ‘ego-interest’, sometimes in the alternative forms of
‘egoistic interest’ or simply ‘interest’, occurs frequently in this lecture,
Freud had first used the term in his paper on narcissism (1914c).
Standard Ed., 14, 82, and it also appears several times in the metapsychological papers of 1915. The term is used regularly in those pass­
ages (as it is in the present one) to distinguish self-preservative forces

XXVI. LIBIDO THEORY AND NARCISSISM

415

libidinal cathexes, their transformations and final vicissitudes,
we were able to obtain a first insight into the machinery of the
mental forces. For this purpose the transference neuroses offered
us the most favourable material. But the ego, its composition
out of various organizations and their construction and mode
of functioning, remained hidden from us; and we were driven
to suspect that only the analysis of other neurotic disorders
would be able to bring us the necessary insight.
We began at an early date to extend psycho-analytic observa­
tions to these other illnesses. Already in 1908 Karl Abraham,
after an exchange of thoughts with me, pronounced the main
characteristic of dementia praecox (which was reckoned among
the psychoses) to be that in it the libidinal cathexis of objects was
lacking. But the question then arose of what happened to the
libido of dementia praecox patients which was turned away
from objects. Abraham did not hesitate to give the answer: it is
turned back on to the ego and this reflexive turning-back is the
source of the megalomania in dementia praecox. Megalomania is
in every way comparable to the familiar sexual overvaluation
of the object in [normal] erotic life.1 In this way for the first
time we learnt to understand a trait in a psychotic illness by
relating it to normal erotic life.
I may tell you at once that these first explanations of
Abraham’s have been accepted in psycho-analysis and have
become the basis of our attitude to the psychoses. We thus
slowly became familiar with the notion that the libido, which
we find attached to objects and which is the expression of an
effort to obtain satisfaction in connection with those objects,
from the libido. The introduction of the concept of narcissism made this
distinction less clear-cut; but it is evident that all through this lecture
(see, in particular, its last paragraph) Freud was at pains to keep ego­
libido (or narcissistic libido) separate from ego-interest (or the self­
preservative instinct). Not long afterwards, however, he abandoned this
attempt and declared (in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g), Standard
Ed., 18, 52) that narcissistic libido ‘had necessarily to be identified with
the “self-preservative instinct” ’. He continued to believe, nevertheless,
that there were object-instincts other than libidinal ones—namely those
which he described as destructive or death instincts. But after the present
work the term ‘interest’ ceased to appear. A fuller account of this is given
in the Editor’s Note to ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’, ibid., 14,113 ff.]
1 [This is discussed in the first of Freud’s Three Essays (1905J),
Standard Ed., 7, 150 ff.]

I

416

,
1

I
;
j
;
I

:
f
!

,

I

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

can also leave the objects and set the subject’s own ego in their
place; and this notion was gradually built up more and more
consistently. The name for this way of allocating the libido—
‘narcissism’—was borrowed by us from a perversion described
by Paul Nacke [1899] in which an adult treats his own body
with all the caresses that are usually devoted to an outside
sexual object.1
Reflection will quickly suggest that if any such fixation of
the libido to the subject’s own body and personality instead of
to an object does occur, it cannot be an exceptional or a trivial
event. On the contrary it is probable that this narcissism is the
universal and original state of things, from which object-love
is only later developed, without the narcissism necessarily disappearing on that account. Indeed we had to recall from the
history of the development of object-libido that many sexual
instincts begin by finding satisfaction in the subject’s own body
—auto-erotically, as we say [p. 314]—and that this capacity for
auto-erotism is the basis of the lagging-behind of sexuality in the
process of education in the reality principle [p. 355]. Auto­
erotism would thus be the sexual activity of the narcissistic stage
of allocation of the libido.
To put the matter shortly, we pictured the relation of ego­
libido to object-libido in a way which I can make plain to
you by an analogy from zoology. Think of those simplest of
living organisms [the amoebas] which consist of a little-differ­
entiated globule of protoplasmic substance. They put out
protrusions, known as pseudopodia, into which they cause the
substance of their body to flow over. They are able, however,
to withdraw the protrusions once more and form themselves
again into a globule. We compare the putting-out of these
protrusions, then, to the emission of libido on to objects while
the main mass of libido can remain in the ego; and we suppose
that in normal circumstances ego-libido can be transformed
unhindered into object-libido and that this can once more be
taken back into the ego.12
1 [The term is in part due to Havelock Ellis. See a full discussion in
an Editor’s footnote to Freud’s paper on narcissism (1914c), StandardEd.,
14, 73 n., which is Freud’s main exposition of the whole subject.]
2 [Some discussion of this analogy will be found in the Editor’s
Appendix B to The Ego and the Id (19234), Standard Ed., 19, 63 ff.J

XXVI. LIBIDO THEORY AND NARCISSISM

417

With the help of these ideas we are now able to explain a
whole number of mental states or, to express it more modestly,
to describe them in terms of the libido theory—states which we
must reckon as belonging to normal life, such as the psychical
behaviour of a person in love, during an organic illness or when
asleep. As regards the state of sleep, we assumed that it was
based on turning-away from the external world and adopting ,
a wish to sleep [p. 88]. The mental activity during the night
which is manifested in dreams takes place, we found, in
obedience to a wish to sleep and is moreover dominated by
purely egoistic motives [p. 142 ].We may now add, on the lines
of the libido theory, that sleep is a state in which all object­
cathexes, libidinal as well as egoistic, are given up and with­
drawn into the ego. May not this throw a fresh light on the
recuperating effect of sleep and on the nature of fatigue in
general? The picture of the blissful isolation of intra-uterine
life which a sleeper conjures up once more before us every
night is in this way completed on its psychical side as well. In
a sleeper the primal state of distribution of the libido is restored
—total narcissism, in which libido and ego-interest, still united
and indistinguishable, dwell in the self-sufficing ego.
This is the place for two remarks. First, how do we differenti­
ate between the concepts of narcissism and egoism? Well,
narcissism, I believe, is the libidinal complement to egoism.
When we speak of egoism, we have in view only the individual’s
advantage', when we talk of narcissism we are also taking his
libidinal satisfaction into account. As practical motives the two
can be traced separately for quite a distance. It is possible to
be absolutely egoistic and yet maintain powerful object­
cathexes, in so far as libidinal satisfaction in relation to the
object forms part of the ego’s needs. In that case, egoism will
see to it that striving for the object involves no damage to the
ego. It is possible to be egoistic and at the same time to be
excessively narcissistic—that is to say, to have very little need
for an object, whether, once more, for the purpose of direct
sexual satisfaction, or in connection with the higher aspirations,
derived from sexual need, which we are occasionally in the
habit of contrasting with ‘sensuality’ under the name of ‘love’.
In all these connections egoism is what is self-evident and

418

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

constant, while narcissism is the variable element. The opposite
to egoism, altruism, does not, as a concept, coincide with libidinal
object-cathexis, but is distinguished from it by the absence of
longings for sexual satisfaction. When someone is completely
in love, however, altruism converges with libidinal objectcathexis. As a rule the sexual object attracts a portion of the
ego’s narcissism to itself, and this becomes noticeable as what
is known as the ‘sexual overvaluation’ of the object. [See above,
p. 415.] If in addition there is an altruistic transposition of
egoism on to the sexual object, the object becomes supremely
powerful; it has, as it were, absorbed the ego.
You will find it refreshing, I believe, if, after what is the
essentially dry imagery of science, I present you with a poetic
representation of the economic1 contrast between narcissism
and being in love. Here is a quotation from Goethe’s Westostlicher Diwan:2
ZULEIKA

The slave, the lord of victories,
The crowd, when’er you ask, confess
In sense of personal being lies
A child of earth’s chief happiness.
There’s not a life we need refuse
If our true self we do not miss,
There’s not a thing we may not lose
If one remain the man one is.
HATEM

So it is held, so well may be;
But down a different track I come;
Of all the bliss earth holds for me
I in Zuleika find the sum.

Does she expend her being on me,
Myself grows to myself of cost;
Turns she away, then instantly
I to my very self am lost.

1 [I.e. the quantitative factor in the energies concerned. See p. 374
above.]
* [The translation is from Ernest Dowden, West Eastern Divan, 1914.
The word ‘divan’ in its original Persian sense, which was adopted by
Goethe, meant ‘a collection of poems’.]

XXVI. LIBIDO THEORY AND NARCISSISM

419

That day with Hatem all were over;
And yet I should but change my state;
Swift, should she grace some happy lover,
In him I were incorporate.

’

i

,

’

,

My second remark is a supplement to the theory of dreams.
We cannot explain the origin of dreams unless we adopt the
hypothesis that the repressed unconscious has achieved some
degree of independence of the ego, so that it does not acquiesce
in the wish to sleep and retains its cathexes even when all the
object-cathexes depending on the ego have been withdrawn
in order to encourage sleep. Only if that is so can we understand
how the unconscious can make use of the lifting or reduction of
the censorship which occurs at night, and can succeed in obtain­
ing control over the day’s residues so as to construct a forbidden
dream-wish out of their material. On the other hand, it may be
that these day’s residues have to thank an already existing con­
nection with the repressed unconscious for some of their resist­
ance to the withdrawal of libido commanded by the wish to
sleep. We will, then, insert this dynamically important feature
into our view of the formation of dreams by way of supplement.1
Organic illness, painful stimulation or inflammation of an
organ, creates a condition which clearly results in a detachment
of the libido from its objects. The libido which is withdrawn
is found in the ego once more, as an increased cathexis of the
diseased part of the body. One may venture to assert, indeed,
that the withdrawal of the libido from its objects in these
circumstances is more striking than the diversion of egoistic
interest from the external world. This seems to offer us a path
to an understanding of hypochondria, in which an organ
excites the ego’s attention in the same way, without being ill
so far as we can perceive.
But I shall resist the temptation of going further here or of
discussing other situations which can be understood or pictured
if we adopt the hypothesis that the object-libido may withdraw
into the ego—for I am obliged to meet two objections which, as
I know, are now attracting your attention. In the first place
1 [This had been discussed by Freud at greater length in his ‘Metapsychological Supplement to the Theory of Dreams’ (1917d [1915]),
Standard Ed., 14, 224 ff.]

i

420

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

you want to call me to account because in talking of sleep,
illness and similar situations I invariably try to separate libido
from interest, sexual from ego-instincts, where observations can
be fully satisfied by the hypothesis of a single and uniform
energy which, being freely mobile, cathects now the object and
now the ego, in obedience to one or the other instinct. And in
the second place you want to know how I can venture to treat
the detaching of the libido from the object as the source of a
pathological state, when a transposition of this kind of object­
libido into ego-libido (or, more generally, into ego-energy) is
among the normal processes of mental dynamics which are
repeated daily and every night.
Here is my reply. Your first objection sounds well enough.
Consideration of the states of sleep, of illness and of being in
love in themselves would probably never have led us to distin­
guish an ego-libido from an object-libido or libido from interest.
But there you are neglecting the investigations from which we
started and in the light of which we now look at the mental
situations under discussion. The differentiation between libido
and interest—that is to say, between the sexual and the self­
preservative instincts—was forced upon us by our discovery of
the conflict out of which the transference neuroses arise. Since
then we cannot give it up. The hypothesis that object-libido
can be transformed into ego-libido, that we must therefore take
an ego-libido into account, seems to us the only one which is
able to resolve the enigma of what are termed the narcissistic
neuroses—dementia praecox, for instance—and to account for
the resemblances and dissimilarities between them and hysteria
or obsessions. We are now applying to illness, sleep and being
in love what we have elsewhere found inescapably established.
We should proceed further with applications of this kind and
see where they will take us to. The only thesis which is not an
immediate precipitate of our analytic experience is to the effect
that libido remains libido, whether it is directed to objects or
to one’s own ego, and never turns into egoistic interest, and the
converse is also true. This thesis, however, is equivalent to the
separation between the sexual and ego-instincts which we have
already considered critically and to which we shall continue
to hold for heuristic reasons until its possible collapse.
Your second observation, too, raises a justifiable question,

I

XXVI. LIBIDO THEORY AND NARCISSISM

421

[

but it is aimed in the wrong direction. It is true that a withdrawal of the object-libido into the ego is not directly pathogenic; it takes place, indeed, as we know, every time before
we go to sleep, only to be reversed when we wake up. The
amoeba withdraws its protrusions only to send them out again
at the first opportunity. But it is quite a different thing when
a particular, very energetic process forces a withdrawal of
libido from objects. Here the libido that has become narcissistic
cannot find its way back to objects, and this interference with
the libido’s mobility certainly becomes pathogenic. It seems
that an accumulation of narcissistic libido beyond a certain
amount is not tolerated. We may even imagine that it was for
that very reason that obj ect-cathexes originally came about,
that the ego was obliged to send out its libido so as not to fall
ill as a result of its being dammed up. If it lay within our plan
to go more deeply into dementia praecox, I would show you
that the process which detaches the libido from objects and
cuts off its return to them is closely related to the process of
repression and is to be looked at as its counterpart. But you
would, first and foremost, find yourselves on familiar ground
when you learnt that the determinants of this process are almost
identical—so far as we know at present—with those of repression. The conflict seems to be the same and to be carried on
between the same forces. If the outcome is so different from, for
instance, that in hysteria, the reason can only depend on a
difference in innate disposition. The weak spot in the libidinal
development of these patients lies in a different phase; the
determining fixation, which, as you will recollect [p. 346],
permits the irruption that leads to the formation of symptoms,
lies elsewhere, probably in the stage of primitive narcissism to
which dementia praecox returns in its final outcome. It is very
remarkable that in the case of all the narcissistic neuroses we
have to assume fixation points for the libido going back to far
earlier phases of development than in hysteria or obsessional
neurosis. As you heard, however, the concepts which we arrived
at during our study of the transference neuroses are adequate
in helping us to find our way about in the narcissistic neuroses
which are so much more severe in practice. The conformities go
very far; at bottom the field of phenomena is the same. And
you can imagine how small a prospect anyone has of explaining

'
;

I
j

i
I!
'!

i

,
j

i
i
|j
'‘

i

422

i
‘
'■

|j,
“l
'
i

'

]
I
.

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

these disorders (which belong within the sphere of psychiatry)
who is not forearmed for his task with an analytic knowledge of
the transference neuroses.
The clinical picture of dementia praecox (which, incidentally,
is very changeable) is not determined exclusively by the symp­
toms arising from the forcing away of the libido from objects
and its accumulation in the ego as narcissistic libido. A large
part, rather, is played by other phenomena, which are derived
from efforts of the libido to attain objects once more and which
thus correspond to an attempt at restitution or recovery. These
latter symptoms are indeed the more striking and noisy; they
exhibit an undeniable resemblance to those of hysteria or, less
frequently, of obsessional neurosis, but nevertheless differ from
them in every respect. It seems as though in dementia praecox
the libido, in its efforts once more to reach objects (that is, the
presentations of objects), does in fact snatch hold of something
of them, but, as it were, only their shadows—I mean the word­
presentations belonging to them. I cannot say more about this
now, but I believe that this behaviour of the libido as it strives
to find its way back has enabled us to obtain an insight into
what really constitutes the difference between a conscious and
an unconscious idea.1
I have now led you into the region in which the next advances
in the work of analysis are to be expected [p. 379]. Since we
have ventured to operate with the concept of ego-libido the
narcissistic neuroses have become accessible to us; the task
before us is to arrive at a dynamic elucidation of these disorders
and at the same time to complete our knowledge of mental life
by coming to understand the ego. The ego-psychology after
which we are seeking must not be based on the data of our self­
perceptions but (as in the case of the libido) on the analysis of
disturbances and disruptions of the ego. It is likely that we shall
have a low opinion of our present knowledge of the vicissitudes
1 [The view that some of the symptoms in the psychoses represent
attempts at recovery was first expressed by Freud in his Schreber
analysis (1911c), Standard Ed., 12, 71, where an Editor’s footnote gives
a number of further references. The point, only hinted at here, as to the
basic distinction between conscious and unconscious ideas, had been
discussed at length in Section VII of the metapsychological paper on the
unconscious (1915c), ibid., 14, 201 ff.]

XXVI. LIBIDO THEORY AND NARCISSISM

423

of the libido, which we have gained from a study of the trans­
ference neuroses, when we have achieved this greater task. But
hitherto we have not made much progress with it. The narcis­
sistic neuroses can scarcely be attacked with the technique that
has served us with the transference neuroses. You will soon
learn why. [Cf. p. 447 below.] What always happens with them
is that, after proceeding for a short distance, we come up against
a wall which brings us to a stop. Even with the transference
neuroses, as you know, we met with barriers of resistance, but
we were able to demolish them bit by bit. In the narcissistic
neuroses the resistance is unconquerable; at the most, we are
able to cast an inquisitive glance over the top of the wall and
spy out what is going on on the other side of it. Our technical
methods must accordingly be replaced by others; and we do not
know yet whether we shall succeed in finding a substitute.
Nevertheless, we have no lack of material with these patients
either. They make a large number of remarks, even if they do not
answer our questions, and for the time being it is our business to
interpret these remarks with the help of the understanding we
have gained from the symptoms of the transference neuroses. The
agreement is great enough to guarantee us some initial advan­
tage. It remains to be seen how far this technique will take us.
There are difficulties in addition which hold up our advance.
The narcissistic disorders and the psychoses related to them can
only be deciphered by observers who have been trained through
the analytic study of the transference neuroses. But our psychia­
trists are not students of psycho-analysis and we psycho-analysts
see too few psychiatric cases. A race of psychiatrists must first
grow up who have passed through the school of psycho-analysis
as a preparatory science. A start in that direction is now being
made in America, where very many leading psychiatrists lecture
to students on the theories of psycho-analysis and where the
proprietors of institutions and the directors of insane asylums
endeavour to observe their patients in conformity with those
theories. Nevertheless we too, over here, have succeeded some­
times in casting a glance over the narcissistic wall, and in what
follows I shall tell you a little of what we think we have detected.
The form of disease known as paranoia, chronic systematic
insanity, occupies an unsettled position in the attempts at

i

424

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

classification made by present-day psychiatry. There is, how­
ever, no doubt of its close affinity to dementia praecox. I once
ventured to suggest that paranoia and dementia praecox should
be brought together under the common designation of ‘para­
phrenia’.1 The forms of paranoia are described according to
their content as megalomania, persecution mania, erotomania,
delusions of jealousy, and so on. We shall not expect anything
much in the way of an attempt at an explanation from
psychiatry. Here is an example of one, though, it is true, one
that is out of date and does not carry much weight—an attempt
to derive one symptom from another by means of an intellectual
rationalization: it is suggested that the patient, who, owing to
a primary disposition, believes that he is being persecuted,
infers from his persecution that he must be someone of quite
particular importance and so develops megalomania. According
to our analytic view the megalomania is the direct result of a
magnification of the ego due to the drawing in of the libidinal
object-cathexes—a secondary narcissism which is a return of the
original early infantile one. We have, however, made a few
observations of persecution mania which have induced us to
follow a particular track. The first thing that struck us was that
in the large majority of cases the persecutor was of the same sex
as the persecuted patient. This was still open to an innocent
explanation; but in a few cases that were thoroughly studied
it was clear that the person of the same sex whom the patient
loved most had, since his illness, been turned into his persecutor.
This made a further development possible: namely, the replace­
ment of the beloved person, along the line of familiar resemb­
lances, by someone else—for instance, a father by a schoolmaster
or by some superior. Experiences of this kind in ever increasing
numbers led us to conclude that paranoia persecutoria is the
form of the disease in which a person is defending himself
against a homosexual impulse which has become too powerful.1
23
The change over from affection to hatred, which, it is well
known, may become a serious threat to the life of the loved and
1 [Some comments on Freud’s use of this term will be found in a
footnote to his first introduction of it in the last section of the Schreber
analysis (1911c), Standard Ed., 12, 76.]
2 [Cf. the third section of Freud’s Schreber analysis (1911c), Standard
Ed., 12, 59 ff.]

XXVI. LIBIDO THEORY AND NARCISSISM

|

1
,
,

F

(

[
I
t
i

425

hated object, corresponds in such cases to the transformation of
libidinal impulses into anxiety which is a regular outcome of
the process of repression. Listen, for instance, to what is, once
again, the most recent instance of my observations in this
connection.
A young doctor had to be expelled from the town in which
he lived because he had threatened the life of the son of a
university professor residing there, who had up till then been
his greatest friend. He attributed really fiendish intentions and
demonic power to this former friend, whom he regarded as
responsible for all the misfortunes that had befallen his family
in recent years, for every piece of ill-luck whether in his home
or in his social life. But that was not all. He believed that this
bad friend and the friend’s father, the Professor, had caused the
war, too, and brought the Russians into the country. His friend
had forfeited his life a thousand times, and our patient was convinced that the criminal’s death would put an end to every evil.
Yet his affection for him was still so strong that it had paralysed
his hand when, on one occasion, he had an opportunity of
shooting down his enemy at close range. In the course of the
short conversations I had with the patient, it came to light
that their friendship went back far into their schooldays. Once
at least it had overstepped the bounds of friendship: a night
which they had spent together had been an occasion for com­
plete sexual intercourse. Our patient had never acquired the
emotional relation to women which would have corresponded
to his age and his attractive personality. He had once been
engaged to a beautiful young girl of good social position; but
she had broken off the engagement because she found that her
fianci was without any affection. Years later, his illness broke
out just at the moment when he had succeeded for the first time
in satisfying a woman completely. When this woman embraced
him in gratitude and devotion, he suddenly had a mysterious
pain that went round the top of his head like a sharp cut. Later
on he interpreted this sensation as though an incision were
being made at an autopsy for exposing the brain. And as his
friend had become a pathological anatomist, it slowly dawned
on him that he alone could have sent this last woman to him
to seduce him. From that point onwards his eyes were
opened to the other persecutions to which he believed he

I

426

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

had been made a victim by the machinations of his one-time
friend.
But what about the cases in which the persecutor is not of
the same sex as the patient and which appear, therefore, to
contradict our explanation of their being a defence against
homosexual libido? A little time ago I had an opportunity of
examining such a case and was able to derive a confirmation
from the apparent contradiction. A girl, who believed she was
being persecuted by a man with whom she had had affectionate
assignations on two occasions, had in fact first had a delusion
that was directed against a woman who could be looked on as
a substitute for her mother. It was only after her second assig­
nation that she took the step of detaching the delusion from the
woman and transferring it to the man. To begin with, there­
fore, the precondition of the persecutor being of the same sex
as the patient was fulfilled in this case too. In making a com­
plaint to a lawyer and to a doctor, the patient made no mention
of this preliminary stage of her delusion and thus gave rise to
an appearance of there being a contradiction of our explanation
of paranoia.1
Homosexual object-choice originally lies closer to narcissism
than does the heterosexual kind. When it is a question, there­
fore, of repelling an undesirably strong homosexual impulse,
the path back to narcissism is made particularly easy. Hitherto
I have had very little opportunity of talking to you about the
foundations of erotic life so far as we have discovered them, and
it is too late now to catch up on the omission. This much,
however, I can emphasize to you. Object-choice, the step
forward in the development of the libido which is made after
the narcissistic stage, can take place according to two different
types: either according to the narcissistic type, where the subject’s
own ego is replaced by another one that is as similar as possible,
or according to the attachment type,2 where people who have
become precious through satisfying the other vital needs are
chosen as objects by the libido as well. A strong libidinal
1 [The case had been reported in full by Freud not long before
(1915/), Standard Ed., 14, 263 ff.]
* [‘Anlehnungstypus.’ This has sometimes been translated ‘anaclitic type'.
This is fully discussed in the second section of Freud’s paper on
narcissism (1914c), Standard Ed., 14, 87 ff. Cf. above, p. 329.]

1

■

'

l

XXVI. LIBIDO THEORY AND NARCISSISM

■

fixation to the narcissistic type of object-choice is to be included
in the predisposition to manifest homosexuality.
You will recall that at our first meeting of the present
academic year I described a case to you of a woman suffering
from delusions of jealousy [p. 248]. Now that we are so near
its end you would no doubt like to hear how delusions are
explained by psycho-analysis. But I have less to tell you about
that than you expect. The fact that a delusion cannot be
shaken by logical arguments or real experiences is explained
in the same way as in the case of an obsession—by its relation
to the unconscious, which is represented and held down by the
delusion or by the obsession. The difference between the two
is based on the difference between the topography and dynamics
of the two illnesses.
As with paranoia, so also with melancholia (of which, incidentally, many different clinical forms have been described)
we have found a point at which it has become possible to obtain
some insight into the internal structure of the disease. We have
discovered that the self-reproaches, with which these melancholic patients torment themselves in the most merciless fashion,
in fact apply to another person, the sexual object which they
have lost or which has become valueless to them through its own
fault. From this we can conclude that the melancholic has, it is
true, withdrawn his libido from the object, but that, by a
process which we must call ‘narcissistic identification’, the
object has been set up in the ego itself, has been, as it were,
projected on to the ego. (Here I can only give you a pictorial
description and not an ordered account on topographical and
dynamic lines.)1 The subject’s own ego is then treated like the
object that has been abandoned, and it is subjected to all the
acts of aggression and expressions of vengefulness which have
been aimed at the object. A melancholic’s propensity to suicide
is also made more intelligible if we consider that the patient’s
embitterment strikes with a single blow at his own ego and at
the loved and hated object. In melancholia, as well as in other
narcissistic disorders, a particular trait in the patient’s emotional
life emerges with peculiar emphasis—what, since Bleuler, we
have been accustomed to describe as ‘ambivalence’. By this
1 [A full account is given in ‘Mourning and Melancholia’ (1917
[1915]).]
S.F. XVI—BE

I

427

I

I

i
i!

,
j.

j

j
j
i !

*

<

!
1
jj
|
j
|
।

i

1

i|
j
3

",
;

I'
I
I'
I

428

'
I
[
I,

■

|
:
i

i

,

.

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES
,
t

we mean the direction towards the same person of contrary—
affectionate and hostile—feelings.1 Unluckily I have been
unable in the course of these lectures to tell you more about this
emotional ambivalence. [Cf. p. 443.]
In addition to narcissistic identification, there is a hysterical
kind, which has been familiar to us very much longer.1
2 I wish
it were possible to illustrate for you the differences between the
two forms by a few clear specifications. There is something I
can tell you about the periodic and cyclical forms ofmelancholia
which I am sure you will be glad to hear. For in favourable
circumstances—I have experienced this twice—it is possible by
analytic treatment in the lucid intervals to prevent the return
of the condition in the same or the opposite emotional mood.
We learn from such cases that in melancholia and mania we
are concerned once more with a special method of dealing with
a conflict whose underlying determinants agree precisely with
those of the other neuroses. You can imagine how much more
there is for psycho-analysis to learn in this field of knowledge.
I told you too [p. 415] that we hoped that the analysis of the
narcissistic disorders would give us an insight into the way in
which our ego is put together and built up out of different
agencies. We have already made a start with this at one point.3*8
From the analysis of delusions of observation we have drawn
the conclusion that there actually exists in the ego an agency
which unceasingly observes, criticizes and compares, and in
that way sets itself over against the other part of the ego. We
believe, therefore, that the patient is betraying a truth to us
which is not yet sufficiently appreciated when he complains
that he is spied upon and observed at every step he takes and
that every one of his thoughts is reported and criticized. His
1 [Some discussion of Freud’s use of the term will be found in an
Editor’s footnote to ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’ (1915c), Standard
Ed., 14, 131.]
8 [An early account of this occurs in The Interpretation of Dreams
(1900a), Standard Ed., 4, 149-51. The distinction between the two kinds
of identification is explained in ‘Mourning and Melancholia’, ibid.,
14, 250-1.]
8 [For what follows see the third section of‘On Narcissism’ (1914c),
Standard Ed., 14, 93 ff. The later development of these ideas is discussed
in the Editor’s Introduction to The Ego and the Id (19234), Standard Ed.,
19, 8-10.]

XXVI. LIBIDO THEORY AND NARCISSISM

।
I
]
I
I
I
’

j

429

only mistake is in regarding this uncomfortable power as some­
thing alien to him and placing it outside himself. He senses an
agency holding sway in his ego which measures his actual ego
and each of its activities by an ideal ego that he has created for
himself in the course of his development. We believe, too, that
this creation was made with the intention of re-establishing the
self-satisfaction which was attached to primary infantile nar­
cissism but which since then has suffered so many disturbances
and mortifications. We know the self-observing agency as the
ego-censor,1 the conscience; it is this that exercises the dream­
censorship during the night, from which the repressions of
inadmissible wishful impulses proceed. When in delusions of
observation it becomes split up, it reveals to us its origin from
the influences of parents, educators and social environment—
from an identification with some of these model figures.
These are a few of the findings which have hitherto been
reached from the application of psycho-analysis to the narcissistic disorders. No doubt there are not yet enough of them
and they still lack the precision which can only be attained from
established familiarity with a new field. We owe all of them to
a use of the concept of ego-libido or narcissistic libido, by •
whose help we can extend to the narcissistic neuroses the views
which have proved their value with the transference neuroses.
Now, however, you will ask whether it is possible that we shall
succeed in subsuming all the disturbances of the narcissistic
illnesses and of the psychoses under the libido theory, whether
we look upon the libidinal factor in mental life as universally
guilty of the causation of illness, and need never attribute the
responsibility for it to changes in the functioning of the self­
preservative instinct. Well, Ladies and Gentlemen, this question
seems to me to call for no urgent reply, and, above all, not to
be ripe for judgement. We can confidently leave it over in expectation of the progress of our scientific work. I should not be
surprised if it turned out that the power to produce pathogenic
1 [The German form used here is the personal ‘Censor’ in contrast
to the impersonal ‘gensur’ in the next part of the sentence, which is the
form almost invariably adopted by Freud. Other instances of this very
exceptional form occur in The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), Standard
Ed., 5, 505-6, in the paper on narcissism (1914c), ibid., 14, 97, and in
the New Introductory Lectures (1933a), ibid., 22, 15.]

’
J
•
J

l

■

,
i

|

430

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

effects was in fact a prerogative of the libidinal instincts, so
that the libido theory could celebrate its triumph all along
the line from the simplest ‘actual’ neurosis to the most severe
alienation of the personality. We after all know that it is a
characteristic feature of the libido that it struggles against
submitting to the reality of the universe—to Ananke [p. 355].
But I regard it as extremely probable that the ego-instincts are
carried along secondarily by the pathogenic instigation of the
libido and forced into functional disturbances. Nor can I think
that it would be a disaster to the trend of our researches, if
what lies before us is the discovery that in severe psychoses the
ego-instincts themselves have gone astray as a primary fact.
The future will give the answer—to you, at any rate.

Let me once more, however, return for a moment to anxiety,
to throw light on a last obscurity that we left there. I have said
[p. 411] that there is something that does not tally with the
relation (so thoroughly recognized apart from this) between
anxiety and libido: the fact, namely, that realistic anxiety in
face of a danger seems to be a manifestation of the self-preserva­
tive instinct—which, after all, can scarcely be disputed. How
would it be, though, if what was responsible for the affect of
anxiety was not the egoistic ego-instincts but the ego-libido?
After all, the state of anxiety is in every instance inexpedient,
and its inexpedience becomes obvious if it reaches a fairly high
pitch. In such cases it interferes with action, whether flight or
defence, which alone is expedient and alone serves the cause of
self-preservation. If, therefore, we attribute the affective portion
of realistic anxiety to ego-libido and the accompanying action
to the self-preservative instinct, we shall have got rid of the
theoretical difficulty. After all, you do not seriously believe that
one runs away because one feels anxiety? No. One feels anxiety
and one runs away for a common motive, which is roused by
the perception of danger. People who have been through a
great mortal danger tell us that they were not at all afraid
but merely acted—for instance, that they aimed their rifle at
the wild beast—and that is unquestionably what was most
expedient.

n
b
ii
L
4r

LECTURE XXVII

TRANSFERENCE1
Ladies and Gentlemen,—Since we are now drawing towards
the end of our discussions, there is a particular expectation
which will be in your minds and which should not be disappointed. You no doubt suppose that I would not have led you
through thick and thin of the subject-matter of psycho-analysis
only to dismiss you at the end without saying a word about
therapy, on which, after all, the possibility of practising psycho­
analysis at all is based. The subject, moreover, is one that I
cannot withhold from you, since what you learn in connection
with it will enable you to make the acquaintance of a new fact
in whose absence your understanding of the illnesses investi­
gated by us will remain most markedly incomplete.
You do not, I know, expect me to initiate you into the technique by which analysis for therapeutic ends should be carried
out. You only want to know in the most general way the method
by which psycho-analytic therapy operates and what, roughly,
it accomplishes. And you have an indisputable right to learn
this. I shall not, however, tell it you but shall insist on your
discovering it for yourselves.
Think it over! You have learnt all that is essential about the
determinants of falling ill as well as all the factors that come into
effect after the patient has fallen ill. Where do these leave room
for any therapeutic influence? In the first place there is hereditaiy disposition. We have not talked about it very often because
it is emphatically stressed from other directions and we have
1 [Freud first broached the idea of transference in his technical contribution to the Breuer and Freud Studies on Hysteria (1895d), Standard
Ed., 2, 301-4. He returned to it in his ‘Dora’ analysis (1905c), ibid., 7,
116-20. But his main discussions of the subject before the present one
will be found in his papers on technique: in particular ‘The Dynamics
of Transference’ (19126) deals with the theoretical side of the pheno­
menon, while ‘Observations on Transference-Love’ (1915a) is con­
cerned with the technical difficulties raised by the positive transference.
Towards the end of his life Freud approached the subject once more in
‘Analysis Terminable and Interminable’ (1937c).]
431

i
,
1

■
'

i
I
l
|

|
<|i
11
i
I
1

432

I!
I1
|
;

|
।
I

i

j
!
• .
!

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

nothing new to say about it. But do not suppose that we under­
estimate it; precisely as therapists we come to realize its power
clearly enough. In any case we can do nothing to alter it; we
too must take it as something given, which sets a limit to our
efforts. Next there is the influence of early experiences in child­
hood, to which we are in the habit of giving prominence in
analysis: they belong to the past and we cannot undo them.
Then comes everything that we have summarized as ‘real
frustration’—the misfortunes of life from which arise depriva­
tion of love, poverty, family quarrels, ill-judged choice of a
partner in marriage, unfavourable social circumstances, and
the strictness of the ethical standards to whose pressure the
individual is subject. Here, to be sure, there would be handles
enough for a very effective therapy, but it would have to be of
the kind which Viennese folklore attributes to the Emperor
Joseph1—the benevolent interference of a powerful personage
before whose will people bow and difficulties vanish. But who
are we, that we should be able to adopt benevolence of this
kind as an instrument of our therapy? Poor ourselves and
socially powerless, and compelled to earn our livelihood from
our medical activity, we are not even in a position to extend our
efforts to people without means, as other doctors with other
methods of treatment are after all able to do. Our therapy is
too time-consuming and too laborious for that to be possible.
Perhaps, however, you are clutching at one of the factors I
have mentioned and believe that there you have found the
point at which our influence can make its attack. If the ethical
restrictions demanded by society play a part in the deprivation
imposed on the patient, treatment can, after all, give him the
courage, or perhaps a direct injunction, to disregard those
barriers and achieve satisfaction and recovery while forgoing
the fulfilment of an ideal that is exalted, but so often not
adhered to, by society. The patient will thus become healthy
by ‘living a full life’ sexually. This, it is true, casts a shadow on
analytic treatment for not serving general morality. What it has
given to the individual it will have taken from the community.
But, Ladies and Gentlemen, who has so seriously misin­
formed you? A recommendation to the patient to ‘live a full life’
1 [Joseph II, whose unconventional methods of distributing charity
were notorious.]

XXVII. TRANSFERENCE

I

‘

.
j

'

I
‘

!
'

433

sexually could not possibly play a part in analytic therapy—if
only because we ourselves have declared that an obstinate con­
flict is taking place in him between a libidinal impulse and
sexual repression, between a sensual and an ascetic trend. This,
conflict would not be solved by our helping one of these trends
to victory over its opponent. We see, indeed, that in neurotics ,
asceticism has the upper hand; and the consequence of this is
precisely that the suppressed sexual tendency finds a way out
in symptoms. If, on the contrary, we were to secure victory for
sensuality, then the sexual repression that had been put on one
side would necessarily be replaced by symptoms. Neither of
these two alternative decisions could end the internal conflict;
in either case one party to it would remain unsatisfied. There
are only a few cases in which the conflict is so unstable that a
factor such as the doctor’s taking sides could decide it; and such
cases do not in fact stand in need of analytic treatment. Anyone
on whom the doctor could have so much influence would have
found the same way out without the doctor. You must be aware
that if an abstinent young man decides in favour of illicit sexual
intercourse or if an unsatisfied wife seeks relief with another
man, they have not as a rule waited for permission from a
doctor or even from their analyst.
In this connection people usually overlook the one essential
point—that the pathogenic conflict in neurotics is not to be con­
fused with a normal struggle between mental impulses both of
which are on the same psychological footing. In the former case
the dissension is between two powers, one of which has made
its way to the stage of what is preconscious or conscious while
the other has been held back at the stage of the unconscious.
For that reason the conflict cannot be brought to an issue; the
disputants can no more come to grips than, in the familiar
simile, a polar bear and a whale. A true decision can only be
reached when they both meet on the same ground. To make
this possible is, I think, the sole task of our therapy.
Moreover, I can assure you that you are misinformed if you
suppose that advice and guidance in the affairs of life play an
integral part in analytic influence. On the contrary, so far as
possible we avoid the role of a mentor such as this, and there
is nothing we would rather bring about than that the patient
should make his decisions for himself. With this purpose, too,

434

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

we require him to postpone for the term of his treatment any
vital decisions on choice of a profession, business undertakings,
marriage or divorce, and only to put them in practice when the
treatment is finished. You must admit that all this is different
from what you pictured. Only in the case of some very youthful
or quite helpless or unstable individuals are we unable to put
the desired limitation of our role into effect. With them we have
to combine the functions of a doctor and an educator; but when
this is so we are quite conscious of our responsibility and behave
with the necessary caution.1
But you must not conclude from my eagerness in defending
myself against the charge that neurotics are encouraged in
analytic treatment to live a full life—you must not conclude
from this that we influence them in favour of conventional
virtue. That is at least as far from being the case. It is true that
we are not reformers but merely observers; nevertheless, we
cannot help observing with a critical eye and we have found it
impossible to side with conventional sexual morality or to form
a very high opinion of the manner in which society attempts
the practical regulation of the problems of sexual life. We can
present society with a blunt calculation that what is described
as its morality calls for a bigger sacrifice than it is worth and
that its proceedings are not based on honesty and do not display
jvisdom. We do not keep such criticisms from our patients’ ears,
we accustom them to giving unprejudiced consideration to
sexual matters no less than to any others; and if, having grown
independent after the completion of their treatment, they de­
cide on their own judgement in favour of some midway position
between living a full life and absolute asceticism, we feel our
conscience clear whatever their choice. We tell ourselves
that anyone who has succeeded in educating himself to truth
about himself is permanently defended against the danger of
immorality, even though his standard of morality may differ in
some respect from that which is customary in society. More­
over, we must guard against over-estimating the importance of
the part played by the question of abstinence in influencing
neuroses. Only in a minority of cases can the pathogenic situa­
tion of frustration and the subsequent damming-up of libido be
1 [Freud discussed this further in the New Introductory Lectures (1933a),
Standard Ed., 22, 148.]

XXVII. TRANSFERENCE

'

435

brought to an end by the sort of sexual intercourse that can be
procured without much trouble.

i
i

*

!

1

*

Thus you cannot explain the therapeutic effect of psycho­
analysis by its permitting a full sexual life. Look around, then,
for something else. I fancy that, while I was rejecting this sug­
gestion of yours, one remark of mine put you on the right track.
What we make use of must no doubt be the replacing of what is
unconscious by what is conscious, the translation of what is un­
conscious into what is conscious. Yes, that is it. By carrying
what is unconscious on into what is conscious, we lift the re­
pressions, we remove the preconditions for the formation of
symptoms, we transform the pathogenic conflict into a normal
one for which it must be possible somehow to find a solution.
All that we bring about in a patient is this single psychical
change: the length to which it is carried is the measure of
the help we provide. Where no repressions (or analogous
psychical processes) can be undone, our therapy has nothing to
expect.
We can express the aim of our efforts in a variety of formulas:
making conscious what is unconscious, lifting repressions, filling
gaps in the memory—all these amount to the same thing. But
perhaps you will be dissatisfied by this admission. You had
formed a different picture of the return to health of a neurotic
patient—that, after submitting to the tedious labours of a
psycho-analysis, he would become another man; but the total
result, so it seems, is that he has rather less that is unconscious
and rather more that is conscious in him than he had before.
The fact is that you are probably under-estimating the importance of an internal change of this kind. The neurotic who is
cured has really become another man, though at bottom, of
course, he has remained the same; that is to say, he has become
what he might have become at best under the most favourable
conditions. But that is a very great deal. If you now hear all
that has to be done and what efforts it needs to bring about
this apparently trivial change in a man’s mental life, you will
no doubt begin to realize the importance of this difference in
psychical levels.
I will digress for a moment to ask if you know what is meant
by a causal therapy. That is how we describe a procedure

।

,
,

i

i
!

;
;]
। <'
'

I■
j;
■<
i:
'
.
I
J

436

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

which does not take the symptoms of an illness as its point of
attack but sets about removing its causes. Well, then, is our
psycho-analytic method a causal therapy or not? The reply is
not a simple one, but it may perhaps give us an opportunity of
realizing the worthlessness of a question framed in this way. In
so far as analytic therapy does not make it its first task to
remove the symptoms, it is behaving like a causal therapy. In
another respect, you may say, it is not. For we long ago traced
the causal chain back through the repressions to the instinctual
dispositions, their relative intensities in the constitution and the
deviations in the course of their development. Supposing, now,
that it was possible, by some chemical means, perhaps, to inter­
fere in this mechanism, to increase or diminish the quantity of
libido present at a given time or to strengthen one instinct at
the cost of another—this then would be a causal therapy in the
true sense of the word, for which our analysis would have car­
ried out the indispensable preliminary work of reconnaissance.
At present, as you know, there is no question of any such
method of influencing libidinal processes; with our psychical
therapy we attack at a different point in the combination—not
exactly at what we know are the roots of the phenomena, but
nevertheless far enough away from the symptoms, at a point
which has been made accessible to us by some very remarkable
circumstances.
What, then, must we do in order to replace what is uncon­
scious in our patients by what is conscious? There was a time
when we thought this was a very simple matter: all that was
necessary was for us to discover this unconscious material and
communicate it to the patient. But we know already that this
was a short-sighted error [p. 281]. Our knowledge about the
unconscious material is not equivalent to his knowledge; if we
communicate our knowledge to him, he does not receive it
instead of his unconscious material but beside it; and that makes
very little change in it. We must rather picture this unconscious
material topographically, we must look for it in his memory at
the place where it became unconscious owing to a repression.
The repression must be got rid of—after which the substitution
of the conscious material for the unconscious can proceed
smoothly. How, then, do we lift a repression of this kind? Here
our task enters a second phase. First, the search for the repres-

H
XXVII. TRANSFERENCE

'{

437

sion and then the removal of the resistance which maintains the
repression.
How do we remove the resistance? In the same way: by
discovering it and showing it to the patient. Indeed, the resistance too is derived from a repression—from the same one that
we are endeavouring to resolve, or from one that took place
earlier. It was set up by the anticathexis which arose in order
to repress the objectionable impulse. Thus we now do the same
thing that we tried to do to begin with: interpret, discover and
communicate; but now we are doing it at the right place. The
anticathexis or the resistance does not form part of the unconscious but of the ego, which is our collaborator, and is so even
if it is not conscious. As we know, the word ‘unconscious’ is
being used here in two senses: on the one hand as a phenomenon
and on the other as a system. This sounds very difficult and
obscure; but is it not only repeating what we have already said
in earlier passages?1 We have long been prepared for it. We
expect that this resistance will be given up and the anticathexis
withdrawn when our interpretation has made it possible for the
ego to recognize it. What are the motive forces that we work
with in such a case? First with the patient’s desire for recovery,
which has induced him to take part with us in our joint work,
and secondly with the help of his intelligence, to which we give
support by our interpretation. There is no doubt that it is easier
for the patient’s intelligence to recognize the resistance and to
find the translation corresponding to what is repressed if we
have previously given him the appropriate anticipatory ideas.
If I say to you: ‘Look up at the sky! There’s a balloon there!’
you will discover it much more easily than if I simply tell you
to look up and see if you can see anything. In the same way, a
student who is looking through a microscope for the first time
is instructed by his teacher as to what he will see; otherwise he
does not see it at all, though it is there and visible.

And now for the fact!2 In a whole number of nervous diseases—in hysteria, anxiety states, obsessional neurosis—our
1 [See the Editor’s footnote 1 on p. 227 above, where these earlier
passages are enumerated and references are given to Freud’s later,
revised views on the subject.]
* [See the opening paragraph of the lecture, p. 431.]

'

।
I
i
!
।
,
;
!
.
j
1
.]
1

J

,
'

■

i

i

438

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

expectation is fulfilled. By searching for the repression in this
way, by uncovering the resistances, by pointing out what is re­
pressed, we really succeed in accomplishing our task—that is, in
overcoming the resistances, lifting the repression and transform­
ing the unconscious material into conscious. In doing so we gain
the clearest impression of the way in which a violent struggle
takes place in the patient’s mind about the overcoming of each
resistance—a normal mental struggle, on the same psychological
ground, between the motives which seek to maintain the anticathexis and those which are prepared to give it up. The former
are the old motives which in the past put the repression into
effect; among the latter are the newly arrived ones which, we
may hope, will decide the conflict in our favour. We have suc­
ceeded in reviving the old conflict which led to repression and
in bringing up for revision the process that was then decided.
The new material that we produce includes, first, the reminder
that the earlier decision led to illness and the promise that a
different path will lead to recovery, and, secondly, the enor­
mous change in all the circumstances that has taken place since
the time of the original rejection. Then the ego was feeble, in­
fantile, and may perhaps have had grounds for banning the
demands of the libido as a danger. To-day it has grown strong
and experienced, and moreover has a helper at hand in the
shape of the doctor. Thus we may expect to lead the revived
conflict to a better outcome than that which ended in re­
pression, and, as I have said, in hysteria and in the anxiety and
obsessional neuroses success proves us in general to be correct.
There are, however, other forms of illness in which, in spite
of the conditions being the same, our therapeutic procedure is
never successful. In them, too, it had been a question of an
original conflict between the ego and the libido which led to
repression—though this may call for a different topographical
description; in them, too, it is possible to trace the points in the
patient’s life at which the repressions occurred; we make use of
the same procedure, are ready to make the same promises and
give the same help by the offer of anticipatory ideas; and once
again the lapse of time between the repressions and the present
day favours a different outcome to the conflict. And yet we do
not succeed in lifting a single resistance or getting rid of
a single repression. These patients, paranoics, melancholics,

XXVII. TRANSFERENCE

439

sufferers from dementia praecox, remain on the whole un­
affected and proof against psycho-analytic therapy. What can
be the reason for this? Not any lack of intelligence. A certain
amount of intellectual capacity is naturally required in our
patients; but there is certainly no lack of it in, for instance, the
extremely shrewd combinatory paranoics [cf. p. 66 f.]. Nor do
any of the other motives seem to be absent. Thus the melan­
cholics have a very high degree of consciousness, absent in
paranoics, that they are ill and that that is why they suffer so
much; but this does not make them more accessible. We are
faced here by a fact which we do not understand and which
therefore leads us to doubt whether we have really understood
all the determinants of our possible success with the other
neuroses.
If we continue to concern ourselves only with our hysterics
and obsessional neurotics, we are soon met by a second fact for
which we were not in the least prepared. For after a while we
cannot help noticing that these patients behave in a quite
peculiar manner to us. We believed, to be sure, that we had
reckoned with all the motives concerned in the treatment, that
we had completely rationalized the situation between us and
the patients so that it could be looked over at a glance like a
sum in arithmetic; yet, in spite of all this, something seems to
creep in which has not been taken into account in our sum.
This unexpected novelty itself takes many shapes, and I will
begin by describing to you the commoner and more easily
understandable of the forms in which it appears.
We notice, then, that the patient, who ought to want nothing
else but to find a way out of his distressing conflicts, develops a
special interest in the person of the doctor. Everything con­
nected with the doctor seems to be more important to him than
his own affairs and to be diverting him from his illness. For a
time, accordingly, relations with him become very agreeable;
he is particularly obliging, tries wherever possible to show his
gratitude, reveals refinements and merits in his nature which we
should not, perhaps, have expected to find in him. The doctor,
too, thereupon forms a favourable opinion of the patient and
appreciates the good fortune which has enabled him to give his
assistance to such a particularly valuable personality. If the
doctor has an opportunity of talking to the patient’s relatives,

t

440

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

he learns to his satisfaction that the liking is a mutual one. The
patient never tires in his home of praising the doctor and of
extolling ever new qualities in him. ‘He’s enthusiastic about
you,’ say his relatives, ‘he trusts you blindly; everything you say
is like a revelation to him.’ Here and there someone in this
chorus has sharper eyes and says: ‘It’s becoming a bore, the
way he talks of nothing else but you and has your name on his
lips all the time.’
Let us hope that the doctor is modest enough to attribute his
patient’s high opinion of him to the hopes he can rouse in him
and to the widening of his intellectual horizon by the surprising
and liberating enlightenment that the treatment brings with it.
Under these conditions the analysis makes fine progress too.
The patient understands what is interpreted to him and be­
comes engrossed in the tasks set him by the treatment; the
material of memories and associations floods in upon him in
plenty, the certainty and appositeness of his interpretations are
a surprise to the doctor, and the latter can only take note with
satisfaction that here is a patient who readily accepts all the
psychological novelties which are apt to provoke the most
bitter contradiction among healthy people in the outside world.
Moreover the cordial relations that prevail during the work of
analysis are accompanied by an objective improvement, which
is recognized on all sides, in the patient’s illness.
But such fine weather cannot last for ever. One day it clouds
over. Difficulties arise in the treatment; the patient declares
that nothing more occurs to him. He gives the clearest impres­
sion of his interest being no longer in the work and of his cheer­
fully disregarding the instructions given him to say everything
that comes into his head and not to give way to any critical
obstacle to doing so. He behaves as though he were outside the
treatment and as though he had not made this agreement with
the doctor. He is evidently occupied with something, but in­
tends to keep it to himself. This is a situation that is dan­
gerous for the treatment. We are unmistakably confronted by
a formidable resistance. But what has happened to account
for it?
If we are able once more to clarify the position, we find that
the cause of the disturbance is that the patient has transferred
on to the doctor intense feelings of affection which are justified

XXVII. TRANSFERENCE

l

i

!

;
I
I

j

441

neither by the doctor’s behaviour nor by the situation that has
developed during the treatment. The form in which this affec­
tion is expressed and what its aims are depend of course on the
personal relation between the two people involved. If those
concerned are a young girl and a youngish man, we shall get
the impression of a normal case of falling in love; we shall find
it understandable that a girl should fall in love with a man
with whom she can be much alone and talk of intimate things
and who has the advantage of having met her as a helpful
superior; and we shall probably overlook the fact that what we
should expect from a neurotic girl would rather be an impedi­
ment in her capacity for love. The further the personal relations
between doctor and patient diverge from this supposed case, the
more we shall be surprised to find nevertheless the same emo­
tional relationship constantly recurring. It may still pass muster
if a woman who is unhappy in her marriage appears to be
seized with a serious passion for a doctor who is still unattached,
if she is ready to seek a divorce in order to be his, or if, where
there are social obstacles, she even expresses no hesitation about
entering into a secret liaison with him. Such things come about
even outside psycho-analysis. But in these circumstances we are
astonished to hear declarations by married women and girls
which bear witness to a quite particular attitude to the thera­
peutic problem: they had always known, they say, that they
could only be cured by love, and before the treatment began
they had expected that through this relation they would at last
be granted what life had hitherto withheld from them; it had
only been in this hope that they had taken so much trouble
over the treatment and overcome all the difficulties in com­
municating their thoughts—and we on our part can add: and
had so easily understood what is otherwise so hard to believe.
But an admission of this sort surprises us: it throws all our calculations to the winds. Can it be that we have left the most
important item out of our account?
And indeed, the greater our experience the less we are able
to resist making this correction, though having to do so puts our
scientific pretensions to shame. On the first few occasions one
might perhaps think that the analytic treatment had come up
against a disturbance due to a chance event—an event, that
is, not intended and not provoked by it. But when a similar

442

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

affectionate attachment by the patient to the doctor is repeated
regularly in every new case, when it comes to light again and
again, under the most unfavourable conditions and where there
are positively grotesque incongruities, even in elderly women
and in relation to grey-bearded men, even where, in our judge­
ment, there is nothing of any kind to entice—then we must
abandon the idea of a chance disturbance and recognize that
we are dealing with a phenomenon which is intimately bound
up with the nature of the illness itself.
This new fact, which we thus recognize so unwillingly, is
known by us as transference. We mean a transference of feelings
on to the person of the doctor, since we do not believe that the
situation in the treatment could justify the development of such
feelings. We suspect, on the contrary, that the whole readiness
for these feelings is derived from elsewhere, that they were
already prepared in the patient and, upon the opportunity
offered by the analytic treatment, are transferred on to the
person of the doctor. Transference can appear as a passionate
demand for love or in more moderate forms; in place of a wish
to be loved, a wish can emerge between a girl and an old man
to be received as a favourite daughter; the libidinal desire can
be toned down into a proposal for an inseparable, but ideally
non-sensual, friendship. Some women succeed in sublimating
the transference and in moulding it till it achieves a kind of
viability; others must express it in its crude, original, and for
the most part, impossible form. But at bottom it is always the
same, and never allows its origin from the same source to be
mistaken.
Before we enquire where we are to find a place for this new
fact, I will complete my description of it. What happens with
male patients? There at least one might hope to escape the
troublesome interference caused by difference of sex and by
sexual attraction. Our answer, however, must be much the
same as in the case of women. There is the same attachment to
the doctor, the same overvaluation of his qualities, the same
absorption in his interests, the same jealousy of everyone close
to him in real life. The sublimated forms of transference are
more frequent between one man and another and straight­
forward sexual demands are rarer, in proportion as manifest
homosexuality is unusual as compared with the other ways in

!

XXVII. TRANSFERENCE

।

which these instinctual components are employed. With his
male patients, again, more often than with women, the doctor
comes across a form of expression of the transference which
seems at first sight to contradict all our previous descriptions—
a hostile or negative transference.

,
l

.
1

’
।
I

‘

|

1
[
|

443

I must begin by making it clear that a transference is present
in the patient from the beginning of the treatment and for a
while is the most powerful motive in its advance. We see no
trace of it and need not bother about it so long as it operates
in favour of the joint work of analysis. If it then changes into a
resistance, we must turn our attention to it and we recognize
that it alters its relation to the treatment under two different
and contrary conditions: firstly, if as an affectionate trend it
has become so powerful, and betrays signs of its origin in a
sexual need so clearly, that it inevitably provokes an internal
opposition to itself, and, secondly, if it consists of hostile instead
of affectionate impulses. The hostile feelings make their appear­
ance as a rule later than the affectionate ones and behind them;
their simultaneous presence gives a good picture of the emotional ambivalence [p. 427 f.] which is dominant in the majority
of our intimate relations with other people. The hostile feelings
are as much an indication of an emotional tie as the affectionate
ones, in the same way as defiance signifies dependence as much
as obedience does, though with a ‘minus’ instead of a ‘plus’
sign before it. We can be in no doubt that the hostile feel­
ings towards the doctor deserve to be called a ‘transference’,
since the situation in the treatment quite certainly offers no
adequate grounds for their origin; this necessary view of the
negative transference assures us, therefore, that we have not
gone wrong in our judgement of the positive or affectionate
one.
Where the transference arises, what difficulties it raises for us,
how we overcome them and what advantages we eventually
derive from it—these are questions to be dealt with in detail in
a technical guide to analysis, and I shall only touch on them
lightly to-day. It is out of the question for us to yield to the
patient’s demands deriving from the transference; it would be
absurd for us to reject them in an unfriendly, still more in an
indignant, manner. We overcome the transference by pointing
S.F. XVI—F F

444

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

out to the patient that his feelings do not arise from the present
situation and do not apply to the person of the doctor, but that
they are repeating something that happened to him earlier.1
In this way we oblige him to transform his repetition into a
memory. By that means the transference, which, whether affec­
tionate or hostile, seemed in every case to constitute the greatest
threat to the treatment, becomes its best tool, by whose help the
most secret compartments of mental life can be opened.
But I should like to say a few words to you to relieve you of
your surprise at the emergence of this unexpected phenomenon.
We must not forget that the patient’s illness, which we have
undertaken to analyse, is not something which has been rounded
off and become rigid but that it is still growing and developing
like a living organism. The beginning of the treatment does not
put an end to this development; when, however, the treatment
has obtained mastery over the patient, what happens is that the
whole of his illness’s new production is concentrated upon a
single point—his relation to the doctor. Thus the transference
may be compared to the cambium layer in a tree between the
wood and the bark, from which the new formation of tissue and
the increase in the girth of the trunk derive. When the trans­
ference has risen to this significance, work upon the patient’s
memories retreats far into the background. Thereafter it is not
incorrect to say that we are no longer concerned with the
patient’s earlier illness but with a newly created and trans­
formed neurosis which has taken the former’s place. We have
followed this new edition of the old disorder from its start, we
have observed its origin and growth, and we are especially well
able to find our way about in it since, as its object, we are
situated at its very centre. All the patient’s symptoms have
abandoned their original meaning and have taken on a new
sense which lies in a relation to the transference; or only such
symptoms have persisted as are capable of undergoing such a
transformation. But the mastering of this new, artificial neurosis
coincides with getting rid of the illness which was originally
brought to the treatment—with the accomplishment of our
therapeutic task. A person who has become normal and free
from the operation of repressed instinctual impulses in his rela1 [Cf. for what follows here ‘Remembering, Repeating and Working
Through’ (1914g), Standard Ed., 12, 150 ff.]

XXVII. TRANSFERENCE

445

tion to the doctor will remain so in his own life after the doctor
has once more withdrawn from it.1
The transference possesses this extraordinary, and for the
treatment, positively central, importance in hysteria, anxiety
hysteria and obsessional neurosis, which are for that reason
rightly classed together as ‘transference neuroses’. No one who
has taken in a full impression of the fact of transference from his
analytic work will any longer doubt the nature of the suppressed
impulses that obtain expression in the symptoms of these
neuroses, and will call for no more powerful evidence of their
libidinal character. It may be said that our conviction of the
significance of symptoms as substitutive satisfactions of the
libido only received its final confirmation after the enlistment
of the transference.
There is every reason now for us to improve our earlier
dynamic account of the therapeutic process and to bring it into
harmony with our new realization. If the patient is to fight hs
way through the normal conflict with the resistances which we
have uncovered for him in the analysis [p. 438], he is in need of
a powerful stimulus which will influence the decision in the
sense which we desire, leading to recovery. Otherwise it might
happen that he would choose in favour of repeating the earlier
outcome and would allow what had been brought up into con­
sciousness to slip back again into repression. At this point what
turns the scale in his struggle is not his intellectual insight—
which is neither strong enough nor free enough for such an
achievement—but simply and solely his relation to the doctor.
In so far as his transference bears a ‘plus’ sign, it clothes the
doctor with authority and is transformed into belief in his com­
munications and explanations. In the absence of such a transference, or if it is a negative one, the patient would never even
give a hearing to the doctor and his arguments. In this his belief
is repeating the story of its own development; it is a derivative
of love and, to start with, needed no arguments. Only later did
he allow them enough room to submit them to examination,
provided they were brought forward by someone he loved.
Without such supports arguments carried no weight, and in
1 [It may be remarked that Freud very much qualified this assertion
in his late technical paper on ‘Analysis Terminable and Interminable
(1937c). Cf. the Editor’s Note to this.]

!

:
jI
[,
;;
j
,

'

1

1
'

1
'
j|
I
!
J
'
|
|
■

,

1

,
'

i

i
!

446

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

most people’s lives they never do. Thus in general a man is only
accessible from the intellectual side too, in so far as he is
capable of a libidinal cathexis of objects; and we have good
reason to recognize and to dread in the amount of his narcissism
a barrier against the possibility of being influenced by even the
best analytic technique.
A capacity for directing libidinal object-cathexes on to people
must of course be attributed to every normal person. The
tendency to transference of the neurotics I have spoken of is
only an extraordinary increase of this universal characteristic.
It would indeed be very strange if a human trait so widespread
and so important had never been noticed or appreciated. And
in fact it has been. Bernheim, with an unerring eye, based his
theory of hypnotic phenomena on the thesis that everyone is in
some way ‘suggestible’. His suggestibility was nothing other
than the tendency to transference, somewhat too narrowly con­
ceived, so that it did not include negative transference. But
Bernheim was never able to say what suggestion actually was
and how it came about. For him it was a fundamental fact on
whose origin he could throw no light. He did not know that his
'suggestibility depended on sexuality, on the activity of the
libido. And it must dawn on us that in our technique we have
abandoned hypnosis only to rediscover suggestion in the shape
of transference.
But here I will pause, and let you have a word; for I see an
objection boiling up in you so fiercely that it would make you
incapable of listening if it were not put into words: ‘Ah! so
you’ve admitted it at last! You work with the help of suggestion,
just like the hypnotists! That is what we’ve thought for a long
time. But, if so, why the roundabout road by way of memories of
the past, discovering the unconscious, interpreting and trans­
lating back distortions—this immense expenditure of labour,
time and money—when the one effective thing is after all only
suggestion? Why do you not make direct suggestions against the
symptoms, as the others do—the honest hypnotists? Moreover,
if you try to excuse yourself for your long detour on the ground
that you have made a number of important psychological dis­
coveries which are hidden by direct suggestion—what about the
certainty of these discoveries now? Are not they a result of sug-

XXVII. TRANSFERENCE

I

(

'

[

447

gestion too, of unintentional suggestion? Is it not possible that
you are forcing on the patient what you want and what seems
to you correct, in this field as well?’
What you are throwing up at me in this is uncommonly in­
teresting and must be answered. But I cannot do so to-day: we
have not the time. Till our next meeting, then. I will answer
you, you will see. But to-day I must finish what I have begun.
I promised to make you understand by the help of the fact of
transference why our therapeutic efforts have no success with
the narcissistic neuroses.
I can do so in a few words, and you will see how simply the
riddle can be solved and how well everything fits together.
Observation shows that sufferers from narcissistic neuroses have
no capacity for transference or only insufficient residues of it.
They reject the doctor, not with hostility but with indifference.
For that reason they cannot be influenced by him either; what
he says leaves them cold, makes no impression on them; consequently the mechanism of cure which we carry through with
other people—the revival of the pathogenic conflict and the
overcoming of the resistance due to repression—cannot be
operated with them. They remain as they are. Often they have
already undertaken attempts at recovery on their own account
which have led to pathological results [p. 422]. We cannot alter
this in any way.
On the basis of our clinical impressions we maintained that
these patients’ object-cathexes must have been given up and
that their object-libido must have been transformed into egolibido [p. 420]. Through this characteristic we distinguished
them from the first group of neurotics (sufferers from hysteria,
anxiety-hysteria and obsessional neurosis). This suspicion is now
confirmed by their behaviour in our attempts at therapy. They
manifest no transference and for that reason are inaccessible
to our efforts and cannot be cured by us.

i

LECTURE XXVIII

ANALYTIC THERAPY1
Ladies and Gentlemen,—You know what we are going to talk
about to-day. You asked me why we do not make use of direct
suggestion in psycho-analytic therapy, when we admit that our
influence rests essentially on transference—that is, on sugges­
tion; and you added a doubt whether, in view of this pre­
dominance of suggestion, we are still able to claim that our
psychological discoveries are objective. I promised I would give
you a detailed reply.
Direct suggestion is suggestion aimed against the manifesta­
tion of the symptoms; it is a struggle between your authority
and the motives for the illness. In this you do not concern your­
self with these motives; you merely request the patient to sup­
press their manifestation in symptoms. It makes no difference
of principle whether you put the patient under hypnosis or not.
Once again Bernheim, with his characteristic perspicacity,
maintained that suggestion was the essential element in the
phenomena of hypnotism, that hypnosis itself was already a re­
sult of suggestion, a suggested state;2 and he preferred to prac­
tise suggestion in a waking state, which can achieve the same
effects as suggestion under hypnosis.
Which would you rather hear first on this question—what
experience tells us or theoretical considerations?
Let us begin with the former. I was a pupil of Bernheim’s,
whom I visited at Nancy in 1889 and whose book on suggestion
1 [This lecture contains Freud’s fullest account of the theory of the
therapeutic effects of psycho-analysis. His later discussion of the ques­
tion in his paper on ‘Analysis Terminable and Interminable’ (1937c)
seems in some respects to be at variance with it. Cf. the Editor’s Note
to that paper. Freud published very little on the details of psycho­
analytic technique. See, however, the technical papers in Volume XII
of the Standard Edition, where a list of his other writings on the subject
will be found.]
2 [Freud subsequently expressed his disagreement with this view of
Bernheim’s. See footnote at the end of Chapter X of Group Psycholog)/
(1921c), Standard Ed., 18, 128 n.]
448

XXVIII. ANALYTIC THERAPY

449

I translated into German.1 I practised hypnotic treatment for
many years, at first by prohibitory suggestion and later in com­
bination with Breuer’s method of questioning the patient.12*1 can
therefore speak of the results of hypnotic or suggestive therapy
on the basis of a wide experience. If, in the words of the old
medical aphorism, an ideal therapy should be rapid, reliable
and not disagreeable for the patient [‘cito, tuto, jucunde’], Bern­
heim’s method fulfilled at least two of these requirements. It
could be carried through much quicker—or, rather, infinitely
quicker—than analytic treatment and it caused the patient
neither trouble nor unpleasantness. For the doctor it became, in
the long run, monotonous: in each case, in the same way, with
the same ceremonial, forbidding the most variegated symptoms
to exist, without being able to learn anything of their sense and
meaning. It was hackwork and not a scientific activity, and it
recalled magic, incantations and hocus-pocus. That could not
weigh, however, against the patient’s interest. But the third
quality was lacking: the procedure was not reliable in any re­
spect. It could be used with one patient, but not with another;
it achieved a great deal with one and very little with another,
and one never knew why. Worse than the capriciousness of the
procedure was the lack of permanence in its successes. If, after
a short time, one had news of the patient once more, the old
ailment was back again or its place had been taken by a new
one. One might hypnotize him again. But in the background
there was the warning given by experienced workers against
robbing the patient of his self-reliance by frequently repeated
hypnosis and so making him an addict to this kind of therapy
as though it were a narcotic. Admittedly sometimes things went
entirely as one would wish: after a few efforts, success was com­
plete and permanent.8 But the conditions determining such a
favourable outcome remained unknown. On one occasion a
severe condition in a woman, which I had entirely got rid of by
1 [In fact Freud translated two of Bernheim’s books: De la suggestion
et de ses applications d la therapeutique (1886, translated 1888-9) and
Hypnotisms, suggestion et psychothfrapie (1891, translated 1892). Freud’s
long preface to the former is included in Standard Ed., 1.]
2 [See p. 292 above.]
8 [An instance of this kind was reported by Freud in an early paper,
‘A Case of Successful Treatment by Hypnotism’ (1892-3).]

450

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

a short hypnotic treatment, returned unchanged after the
patient had, through no action on my part, got annoyed with
me; after a reconciliation, I removed the trouble again and far
more thoroughly; yet it returned once more after she had fallen
foul of me a second time. On another occasion a woman
patient, whom I had repeatedly helped out of neurotic states
by hypnosis, suddenly, during the treatment of a specially
obstinate situation, threw her arms round my neck.1 After this
one could scarcely avoid, whether one wanted to or not, in­
vestigating the question of the nature and origin of one’s
authority in suggestive treatment.
So much for experiences. They show us that in renouncing
direct suggestion we are not giving up anything of irreplaceable
value. Now let us add a few reflections to this. The practice of
hypnotic therapy makes very small demands on either the
patient or the doctor. It agrees most beautifully with the esti­
mate in which neuroses are still held by the majority of doctors.
The doctor says to the neurotic patient: ‘There’s nothing wrong
with you, it’s only a question of nerves; so I can blow away your
trouble in two or three minutes with just a few words.’ But our
views on the laws of energy are offended by the notion of its
being possible to move a great weight by a tiny application of
force, attacking it directly, without the outside help of any
appropriate appliances. In so far as the conditions are com­
parable, experience shows that this feat is not successfully
accomplished in the case of the neuroses either. But I am aware
that this argument is not unimpeachable. There is such a thing
as a ‘trigger-action’.
In the light of the knowledge we have gained from psycho­
analysis we can describe the difference between hypnotic and
psycho-analytic suggestion as follows. Hypnotic treatment seeks
to cover up and gloss over something in mental life; analytic
treatment seeks to expose and get rid of something.1
2 The former
acts like a cosmetic, the latter like surgery. The former makes
use of suggestion in order to forbid the symptoms; it strengthens
1 [Freud described this episode again later, in his Autobiographical
Study (\V25d), Standard Ed., 20, 27.]
2 [This distinction is developed at some length in an early paper of
Freud’s ‘On Psychotherapy’ (1905a), Standard Ed., 7, 260-1.]

1

XXVIII. ANALYTIC THERAPY

’

'
i
■

(

'

1
t
..

j
■

I

451

the repressions, but, apart from that, leaves all the processes
that have led to the formation of the symptoms unaltered.
Analytic treatment makes its impact further back towards the
roots, where the conflicts are which gave rise to the symptoms,
and uses suggestion in order to alter the outcome of those con­
flicts. Hypnotic treatment leaves the patient inert and un­
changed, and for that reason, too, equally unable to resist any
fresh occasion for falling ill. An analytic treatment demands
from both doctor and patient the accomplishment of serious
work, which is employed in lifting internal resistances. Through
the overcoming of these resistances the patient’s mental life is
permanently changed, is raised to a high level of development
and remains protected against fresh possibilities of falling ill.1
This work of overcoming resistances is the essential function of
analytic treatment; the patient has to accomplish it and the
doctor makes this possible for him with the help of sugges­
tion operating in an educative sense. For that reason psycho­
analytic treatment has justly been described as a kind of aftereducation.2
I hope I have now made it clear to you in what way our
method of employing suggestion therapeutically differs from
the only method possible in hypnotic treatment. You will
understand too, from the fact that suggestion can be traced back
to transference, the capriciousness which struck us in hypnotic
therapy, while analytic treatment remains calculable within its
limits. In using hypnosis we are dependent on the state of the
patient’s capacity for transference without being able to influence it itself. The transference of a person who is to be
hypnotized may be negative or, as most frequently, ambivalent,
or he may have protected himself against his transference by
adopting special attitudes; of that we learn nothing. In psycho­
analysis we act upon the transference itself, resolve what opposes
it, adjust the instrument with which we wish to make our im­
pact. Thus it becomes possible for us to derive an entirely fresh
advantage from the power of suggestion; we get it into our
hands. The patient does not suggest to himself whatever he
1 [Cf. footnote, p. 445 above.]
8 [See the paper ‘On Psychotherapy’ referred to above {Standard Ed.,
7,266-7), where, incidentally, the German word ‘Nacherziehung' (‘after­
education’) is wrongly translated ‘re-education’.]

i

I

I

I

452

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

pleases: we guide his suggestion so far as he is in any way
accessible to its influence.

<.
i
!
|
.

,j

[
'
:
'

!
;

But you will now tell me that, no matter whether we call the
motive force of our analysis transference or suggestion, there is a
risk that the influencing of our patient may make the objective
certainty of our findings doubtful. What is advantageous to our
therapy is damaging to our researches. This is the objection that
is most often raised against psycho-analysis, and it must be
admitted that, though it is groundless, it cannot be rejected as
unreasonable. If it were justified, psycho-analysis would be
nothing more than a particularly well-disguised and particu­
larly effective form of suggestive treatment and we should have
to attach little weight to all that it tells us about what influences
our lives, the dynamics of the mind or the unconscious. That is
what our opponents believe; and in especial they think that we
have ‘talked’ the patients into everything relating to the im­
portance of sexual experiences—or even into those experiences
themselves—after such notions have grown up in our own de­
praved imagination. These accusations are contradicted more
easily by an appeal to experience than by the help of theory.
Anyone who has himself carried out psycho-analyses will have
been able to convince himself on countless occasions that it is
impossible to make suggestions to a patient in that way. The
doctor has no difficulty, of course, in making him a supporter
of some particular theory and in thus making him share some
possible error of his own. In this respect the patient is behaving
like anyone else—like a pupil—but this only affects his intelligence, not his illness. After all, his conflicts will only be success­
fully solved and his resistances overcome if the anticipatory
ideas he is given tally with what is real in him. Whatever in the
doctor’s conjectures is inaccurate drops out in the course of the
analysis;1 it has to be withdrawn and replaced by something
more correct. We endeavour by a careful technique to avoid the
occurrence of premature successes due to suggestion; but no
harm is done even if they do occur, for we are not satisfied by a
first success. We do not regard an analysis as at an end until all
the obscurities of the case are cleared up, the gaps in the
1 [Freud gives a small example of this in the ‘Wolf-Man’ case history

(19186), Standard Ed.,

17,

80.]

XXVIII. ANALYTIC THERAPY

’

I

'

।

453

patient’s memory filled in, the precipitating causes of the re­
pressions discovered. We look upon successes that set in too
soon as obstacles rather than as a help to the work of analysis;
and we put an end to such successes by constantly resolving the
transference on which they are based. It is this last characteristic
which is the fundamental distinction between analytic and
purely suggestive therapy, and which frees the results of analysis
from the suspicion of being successes due to suggestion. In
every other kind of suggestive treatment the transference is
carefully preserved and left untouched; in analysis it is itself
subjected to treatment and is dissected in all the shapes in
which it appears. At the end of an analytic treatment the trans­
ference must itself be cleared away; and if success is then
obtained or continues, it rests, not on suggestion, but on the
achievement by its means of an overcoming of internal resist­
ances, on the internal change that has been brought about in
the patient.
The acceptance of suggestions on individual points is no
doubt discouraged by the fact that during the treatment we are
struggling unceasingly against resistances which are able to
transform themselves into negative (hostile) transferences. Nor
must we fail to point out that a large number of the individual
findings of analysis, which might otherwise be suspected of
being products of suggestion, are confirmed from another and
irreproachable source. Our guarantors in this case are the
sufferers from dementia praecox and paranoia, who are of
course far above any suspicion of being influenced by suggestion. The translations of symbols and the phantasies, which
these patients produce for us and which in them have forced
their way through into consciousness, coincide faithfully with
the results of our investigations into the unconscious of trans­
ference neurotics and thus confirm the objective correctness of
our interpretations, on which doubt is so often thrown. You
will not, I think, be going astray if you trust analysis on these
points.
I will now complete my picture of the mechanism of cure by
clothing it in the formulas of the libido theory. A neurotic is
incapable of enjoyment and of efficiency—the former because
his libido is not directed on to any real object and the latter

T

454

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

because he is obliged to employ a great deal of his available
energy on keeping his libido under repression and on warding
off its assaults. He would become healthy if the conflict between
his ego and his libido came to an end and if his ego had his
libido again at its disposal. The therapeutic task consists, there­
fore, in freeing the libido from its present attachments, which
are withdrawn from the ego, and in making it once more
serviceable to the ego. Where, then, is the neurotic’s libido
situated? It is easily found: it is attached to the symptoms,
which yield it the only substitutive satisfaction possible at the
time. We must therefore make ourselves masters of the symp­
toms and resolve them—which is precisely the same thing that
the patient requires of us. In order to resolve the symptoms,
we must go back as far as their origin, we must renew the
conflict from which they arose, and, with the help of motive
forces which were not at the patient’s disposal in the past, we
must guide it to a different outcome. This revision of the process
of repression can be accomplished only in part in connection
with the memory traces of the processes which led to repression.
The decisive part of the work is achieved by creating in the
patient’s relation to the doctor—in the ‘transference’—new
editions of the old conflicts; in these the patient would like to
behave in the same way as he did in the past, while we, by
summoning up every available mental force [in the patient],
compel him to come to a fresh decision. Thus the transference
becomes the battlefield on which all the mutually struggling
forces should meet one another.
All the libido, as well as everything opposing it, is made to
converge solely on the relation with the doctor. In this process
the symptoms are inevitably divested of libido. In place of his
patient’s true illness there appears the artificially constructed
transference illness, in place of the various unreal objects of the
libido there appears a single, and once more imaginary, object
in the person of the doctor. But, by the help of the doctor’s
suggestion, the new struggle around this object is lifted to the
highest psychical level: it takes place as a normal mental con­
flict. Since a fresh repression is avoided, the alienation between
ego and libido is brought to an end and the subject’s mental
unity is restored. When the libido is released once more from
its temporary object in the person of the doctor, it cannot return

XXVIII. ANALYTIC THERAPY

455

to its earlier objects, but is at the disposal of the ego. The
forces against which we have been struggling during our work
of therapy are, on the one hand, the ego’s antipathy to certain
trends of the libido—an antipathy expressed in a tendency
to repression—and, on the other hand, the tenacity or adhesive­
ness of the libido [p. 348], which dislikes leaving objects that it
has once cathected.
Thus our therapeutic work falls into two phases. In the first,
all the libido is forced from the symptoms into the transference
and concentrated there; in the second, the struggle is waged
around this new object and the libido is liberated from it. The
change which is decisive for a favourable outcome is the
elimination of repression in this renewed conflict, so that the
libido cannot withdraw once more from the ego by flight into
the unconscious. This is made possible by the alteration of the
ego which is accomplished under the influence of the doctor’s
suggestion. By means of the work of interpretation, which
transforms what is unconscious into what is conscious, the ego
is enlarged at the cost of this unconscious; by means of instruc­
tion, it is made conciliatory towards the libido and inclined to
grant it some satisfaction, and its repugnance to the claims of
the libido is diminished by the possibility of disposing of a
portion of it by sublimation. The more closely events in the
treatment coincide with this ideal description, the greater will
be the success of the psycho-analytic therapy. It finds its limits
in the lack of mobility of the libido, which may refuse to leave
its objects, and the rigidity of narcissism, which will not allow
transference on to objects to increase beyond certain bounds.
Further light may perhaps be thrown on the dynamics of
the process of cure if I say that we get hold of the whole of
the libido which has been withdrawn from the dominance
of the ego by attracting a portion of it on to ourselves by means
of the transference.
It will not be out of place to give a warning that we can draw
no direct conclusion from the distribution of the libido during
and resulting from the treatment as to how it was distributed
during the illness. Suppose we succeeded in bringing a case to
a favourable conclusion by setting up and then resolving a
strong father-transference to the doctor. It would not be correct
to conclude that the patient had suffered previously from a

456

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

similar unconscious attachment of his libido to his father. His
father-transference was merely the battlefield on which we
gained control of his libido; the patient’s libido was directed
to it from other positions. A battlefield need not necessarily coin­
cide with one of the enemy’s key fortresses. The defence of a
hostile capital need not take place just in front of its gates. Not
until after the transference has once more been resolved can
we reconstruct in our thoughts the distribution of libido which
had prevailed during the illness.

From the standpoint of the libido theory, too, we may say
a last word on dreams. A neurotic’s dreams help us, like his
parapraxes and his free associations to them, to discover the
sense of his symptoms and to reveal the way in which his libido
is allocated. They show us, in the form of a wish-fulfilment,
what wishful impulses have been subjected to repression and to
what objects the libido withdrawn from the ego has become
attached. For this reason the interpretation of dreams plays a
large part in a psycho-analytic treatment, and in some cases it
is over long periods the most important instrument of our work.
We already know [p. 218] that the state of sleep in itself leads
to a certain relaxation of the repressions. A repressed impulse,
owing to this reduction in the pressure weighing down upon it,
becomes able to express itself far more clearly in a dream than
it can be allowed to be expressed by a symptom during the day.
The study of dreams therefore becomes the most convenient
means of access to a knowledge of the repressed unconscious,
of which the libido withdrawn from the ego forms a part.
But the dreams of neurotics do not differ in any important
respect from those of normal people; it is possible, indeed, that
they cannot be distinguished from them at all. It would be
absurd to give an account of the dreams of neurotics which
could not also apply to the dreams of normal people. We must
therefore say that the difference between neurosis and health
holds only during the day; it is not prolonged into dream-life.
We are obliged to carry over to healthy people a number of
hypotheses which arise in connection with neurotics as a result
of the link between the latter’s dreams and their symptoms. We
cannot deny that healthy people as well possess in their mental
fife what alone makes possible the formation both of dreams and

XXVIII. ANALYTIC THERAPY

457

of symptoms, and we must conclude that they too have carried
out repressions, that they expend a certain amount of energy in
order to maintain them, that their unconscious system conceals
repressed impulses which are still cathected with energy, and
that a portion of their libido is withdrawn from their ego’s disposal.
Thus a healthy person, too, is virtually a neurotic; but dreams
appear to be the only symptoms which he is capable of forming.
It is true that if one subjects his waking life to a closer examina­
tion one discovers something that contradicts this appearance—
namely that this ostensibly healthy life is interspersed with a
great number of trivial and in practice unimportant symptoms.
The distinction between nervous health and neurosis is thus
reduced to a practical question and is decided by the outcome
—by whether the subject is left with a sufficient amount of
capacity for enjoyment and of efficiency. It probably goes back
to the relative sizes of the quota of energy that remains free and
of that which is bound by repression, and is of a quantitative
not of a qualitative nature. I need not tell you that this discovery
is the theoretical justification for our conviction that neuroses
are in principle curable in spite of their being based on con­
stitutional disposition.
The identity of the dreams of healthy and neurotic people
enables us to infer thus much in regard to defining the char­
acteristics of health. But in regard to dreams themselves we can
make a further inference: we must not detach them from their
connection with neurotic symptoms, we must not suppose that
their essential nature is exhausted by the formula that describes
them as a translation of thoughts into an archaic form of
expression [p. 199], but we must suppose that they exhibit to
us allocations of the libido and obj ect-cathexes that are really
present.1

We shall soon have reached the end. You are perhaps dis­
appointed that on the topic of the psycho-analytic method of
therapy I have only spoken to you about theory and not about
the conditions which determine whether a treatment is to be
undertaken or about the results it produces. I shall discuss
1 [Some interesting remarks on the dreams of psychotic patients will
be found in Section B of‘Some Neurotic Mechanisms’ (19224), Standard
Ed., 18, 227 and 229-30.]

I

l'

458

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

neither: the former because it is not my intention to give you
practical instructions on how to carry out a psycho-analysis,
and the latter because several reasons deter me from it. At the
beginning of our talks [this year, p. 256], I emphasized the fact
that under favourable conditions we achieve successes which
are second to none of the finest in the field of internal medicine;
and I can now add something further—namely that they could
not have been achieved by any other procedure. If I were to
say more than this I should be suspected of trying to drown the
loudly raised voices of depreciation by self-advertisement. The
threat has repeatedly been made against psycho-analysts by our
medical ‘colleagues’—even at public congresses—that a collec­
tion of the failures and damaging results of analysis would be
published which would open the suffering public’s eyes to the
worthlessness of this method of treatment. But, apart from the
malicious, denunciatory character of such a measure, it would
not even be calculated to make it possible to form a correct
judgement of the therapeutic effectiveness of analysis. Analytic
therapy, as you know, is in its youth; it has taken a long time to
establish its technique, and that could only be done in the
course of working and under the influence of increasing experi­
ence. In consequence of the difficulties in giving instruction, the
doctor who is a beginner in psycho-analysis is thrown back to
a greater extent than other specialists on his own capacity for
further development, and the results of his first years will never
make it possible to judge the efficacy of analytic therapy.
Many attempts at treatment miscarried during the early
period of analysis because they were undertaken in cases which
were altogether unsuited to the procedure and which we should
exclude to-day on the basis of our present view of the indications
for treatment. But these indications, too, could only be arrived
at by experiment. In those days we did not know a priori that
paranoia and dementia praecox in strongly marked forms are
inaccessible, and we had a right to make trial of the method
on all kinds of disorders. But most of the failures of those early
years were due not to the doctor’s fault or an unsuitable choice
of patients but to unfavourable external conditions. Here we
have only dealt with internal resistances, those of the patient,
which are inevitable and can be overcome. The external
resistances which arise from the patient’s circumstances, from

XXVIII. ANALYTIC THERAPY

||

'
,
I
•

'
।
,

!
|
|
।
I

i
j
।

।
I
,
i
।
I
I
l
I
1

his environment, are of small theoretical interest but of the
greatest practical importance. Psycho-analytic treatment may
be compared with a surgical operation and may similarly claim
to be carried out under arrangements that will be the most
favourable for its success. You know the precautionary measures
adopted by a surgeon: a suitable room, good lighting, assistants,
exclusion of the patient’s relatives, and so on. Ask yourselves
now how many of these operations would turn out successfully
if they had to take place in the presence of all the members of
the patient’s family, who would stick their noses into the field
of the operation and exclaim aloud at every incision. In psycho­
analytic treatments the intervention of relatives is a positive
danger and a danger one does not know how to meet. One is
armed against the patient’s internal resistances, which one
knows are inevitable, but how can one ward off these external
resistances? No kind of explanations make any impression on
the patient’s relatives; they cannot be induced to keep at a
distance from the whole business, and one cannot make
common cause with them because of the risk of losing the
confidence of the patient, who—quite rightly, moreover—
expects the person in whom he has put his trust to take his side.
No one who has any experience of the rifts which so often
divide a family will, if he is an analyst, be surprised to find that
the patient’s closest relatives sometimes betray less interest in
his recovering than in his remaining as he is. When, as so often,
the neurosis is related to conflicts between members of a family,
the healthy party will not hesitate long in choosing between his
own interest and the sick party’s recovery. It is not to be
wondered at, indeed, if a husband looks with disfavour on a
treatment in which, as he may rightly suspect, the whole catalogue of his sins will be brought to light. Nor do we wonder
at it; but we cannot in that case blame ourselves if our efforts
remain unsuccessful and the treatment is broken off prematurely because the husband’s resistance is added to that
of his sick wife. We had in fact undertaken something which in
the prevailing circumstances was unrealizable.
Instead of reporting a number of cases, I will tell you the
story of a single one, in which, from considerations of medical
discretion, I was condemned to play a long-suffering part. I
undertook the analytic treatment—it was many years ago—of a
S.F. XVI—G G

J

459

460

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

girl who had for some time been unable, owing to anxiety, to
go out in the street or to stay at home by herself. The patient
slowly brought out an admission that her imagination had been
seized by chance observations of the affectionate relations
between her mother and a well-to-do friend of the family. But
she was so clumsy—or so subtle—that she gave her mother a
hint of what was being talked about in the analytic sessions.
She brought this about by changing her behaviour towards her
mother, by insisting on being protected by no one but her
mother from her anxiety at being alone and by barring the door
to her in her anxiety if she tried to leave the house. Her
mother had herself been very neurotic in the past, but had been
cured years before in a hydropathic establishment. Or rather,
she had there made the acquaintance of the man with whom
she was able to enter into a relation that was in every way
satisfying to her. The girl’s passionate demands took her aback,
and she suddenly understood the meaning of her daughter’s
anxiety: the girl had made herself ill in order to keep her
mother prisoner and to rob her of the freedom of movement
that her relations with her lover required. The mother quickly
made up her mind and brought the obnoxious treatment to an
end. The girl was taken to a sanatorium for nervous diseases
and was demonstrated for many years as ‘a poor victim of
psycho-analysis’. All this time, too, I was pursued by the
calumny of responsibility for the unhappy end of the treatment.
I kept silence, for I thought I was bound by the duty of medical
discretion. Long afterwards I learnt from one of my colleagues,
who visited the sanatorium and had seen the agoraphobic girl
there, that the liaison between her mother and the well-to-do
friend of the family was common knowledge in the city and that
it was probably connived at by the husband and father. Thus
it was to this ‘secret’ that the treatment had been sacrificed.
In the years before the war, when arrivals from many foreign
countries made me independent of the favour or disfavour of
my own city, I followed a rule of not taking on a patient for
treatment unless he was sui juris, not dependent on anyone else
in the essential relations of his life. This is not possible, however,
for every psycho-analyst. Perhaps you may conclude from my
warning against relatives that patients designed for psycho­
analysis should be removed from their families and that this

XXVIII. ANALYTIC THERAPY

I
1

461

kind of treatment should accordingly be restricted to inmates
of hospitals for nervous diseases. I could not, however, follow
you in that. It is much more advantageous for patients (in so far
as they are not in a phase of severe exhaustion) to remain during
the treatment in the conditions in which they have to struggle
with the tasks that face them. But the patients’ relatives ought
not to cancel out this advantage by their conduct and should
not offer any hostile opposition to the doctor’s efforts. But how
do you propose to influence in that direction factors like these
which are inaccessible to us? And you will guess, of course, how
much the prospects of a treatment are determined by the
patient’s social milieu and the cultural level of his family.
This presents a gloomy prospect for the effectiveness of
psycho-analysis as a therapy—does it not?—even though we
are able to explain the great majority of our failures by attribut­
ing them to interfering external factors. Friends of analysis
have advised us to meet the threatened publication of our
failures with statistics of our successes drawn up by ourselves.
I did not agree to this. I pointed out that statistics are worthless
if the items assembled in them are too heterogeneous; and the
cases of neurotic illness which we had taken into treatment were
in fact incomparable in a great variety of respects. Moreover,
the period of time that could be covered was too short to make
it possible to judge the durability of the cures.1 And it was
altogether impossible to report on many of the cases: they con­
cerned people who had kept both their illness and its treatment
secret, and their recovery had equally to be kept secret. But
the strongest reason for holding back lay in the realization
that in matters of therapy people behave highly irrationally,
so that one has no prospect of accomplishing anything with
them by rational means. A therapeutic novelty is either received
with delirious enthusiasm—as, for instance, when Koch intro­
duced his first tuberculin against tuberculosis to the public1
2—
or it is treated with abysmal distrust—like Jenner’s vaccination,
which was in fact a blessing and which even to-day has its
irreconcilable opponents. There was obviously a prejudice
1 [Freud recurred to this question in the New Introductory Lectures
(1933a), Standard Ed., 22, 152, where the therapeutic value of psycho­
analysis is again discussed.]
2 [In 1890. Its promise was not fulfilled.]

462

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

against psycho-analysis. If one had cured a severe case, one
might hear people say: ‘That proves nothing. He would have
recovered on his own account by this time.’ And when a woman
patient, who had already passed through four cycles of depres­
sion and mania, came to be treated by me during an interval
after an attack of melancholia and three weeks later started on
a phase of mania, all the members of her family—and a high
medical authority, too, who was called in for consultation—
were convinced that the fresh attack could only be the result
of my attempted analysis. Nothing can be done against pre­
judices. You can see it again to-day in the prejudices which each
group of nations at war has developed against the other. The
most sensible thing to do is to wait, and to leave such prejudices
to the eroding effects of time. One day the same people begin
to think about the same things in quite a different way from
before; why they did not think so earlier remains a dark
mystery.
It is possible that the prejudice against analytic treatment is
already diminishing. The constant spread of analytic teachings,
the increasing number of doctors practising analysis in a number
of countries seems to vouch for this. When I was a young doctor,
I found myself in a similar storm of indignation on the doctors’
part against treatment by hypnotic suggestion, which is now
held up in contrast to analysis by people of ‘moderate’ views.1
Hypnotism, however, has not fulfilled its original promise as a
therapeutic agent. We psycho-analysts may claim to be its
legitimate heirs and we do not forget how much encouragement
and theoretical clarification we owe to it. The damaging results
attributed to psycho-analysis are restricted essentially to passing
manifestations of increased conflict if an analysis is clumsily
carried out or if it is broken off in the middle. You have heard
an account of what we do with our patients and can form your
own judgement as to whether our efforts are calculated to lead
to any lasting damage. Abuse of analysis is possible in various
directions; in particular, the transference is a dangerous instru­
ment in the hands of an unconscientious doctor. But no medical
1 [Some striking evidence of the medical opposition to hypnotism will
be found in an early review by Freud of a book on the subject by the
well-known Swiss psychiatrist, August Forel (Freud, 1889a), Standard
Ed., 1.]

XXVIII. ANALYTIC THERAPY

463

instrument or procedure is guaranteed against abuse; if a knife
does not cut, it cannot be used for healing either.
I have finished, Ladies and Gentlemen. It is more than a
conventional form of words if I admit that I myself am pro­
foundly aware of the many defects in the lectures I have given
you. I regret above all that I have so often promised to return
later to a topic I have lightly touched on and have then found
no opportunity of redeeming my promise. I undertook to give
you an account of a subject which is still incomplete and in
process of development, and my condensed summary has itself
turned out to be an incomplete one. At some points I have set
out the material on which to draw a conclusion and have then
myself not drawn it. But I could not pretend to make you into
experts; I have only tried to stimulate and enlighten you.

i
■
J

l
I

i

i

I
I

BIBLIOGRAPHY
AND AUTHOR INDEX
[
I
\

[Titles of books and periodicals are in italics; titles of papers are in
inverted commas. Abbreviations are in accordance with the World List
of Scientific Periodicals (London, 1952). Further abbreviations used in this
volume will be found in the List at the end of this bibliography.
Numerals in thick type refer to volumes; ordinary numerals refer to
pages. The figures in round brackets at the end of each entry indicate
the page or pages of this volume on which the work in question is
mentioned. In the case of the Freud entries, the letters attached to the
dates of publication are in accordance with the corresponding entries
in the complete bibliography of Freud’s writings to be included in the
last volume of the Standard Edition.
For non-technical authors, and for technical authors where no specific
work is mentioned, see the General Index.]

[
1
:
i

Abel, K. (1884) Uber den Gegensinn der Urworte, Leipzig. (179-80

।

229-30)

l

Abraham, K. (1908) ‘Die psychosexuellen Differenzen der Hysterie und

'

'

■
■

,

der Dementia praecox’, £iZ. Nervenheilk. Psychiat., N.F. 19, 521.
(415)
.
[Trans.: ‘The Psycho-Sexual Differences Between Hysteria and
Dementia Praecox’, Selected Papers on Psycho-Analysis, London,
1927, Chap. IL]
(1916) ‘Untersuchungen fiber die frfiheste pragenitale Entwicklungsstufe der Libido’, Int. Z- (arztl.) Psychoanal., 4, 71. (327)
[Trans.: ‘The First Pregenital Stage of the Libido’, Selected Papers
on Psycho-Analysis, London, 1927, Chap. XIL]
Adler, A. (1910) ‘Der psychische Hermaphroditismus im Leben und
in der Neurose’, Fortschr. Med., 28, 486. (237)
(1912) Uber den nervbsen Charakter, Wiesbaden. (381)
[Trans.: The Neurotic Constitution, New York, 1916; London, 1918.]
Andreas-Salom£, L. (1916) ‘ “Anal” und “Sexual” ’, Imago, 4, 249.
(315)
..
...
Aristotle, De somniis and De divinatione per somnum. (88)
[Trans.: in On the Soul, Loeb Classical Library (trans. W. S.
Hett), London and New York, 1935.]
Artemidorus of Daldis, Oneirocritica. (86, 236)
[Trans. (Abridged): The Interpretation ofDreams (trans. R. Wood),
London, 1644.]
Bernheim, H. (1886) De la suggestion et de ses applications h la thlrapeutique, Paris. (448-9)
(1891) Hypnotisme, suggestion et psychothlrapie: dtudes nouvelles, Paris.
(449)
464

BIBLIOGRAPHY

465

I
|

Binet, A. (1888) Etudes de psychologic exptrimentale: le fttichisme dans

P amour, Paris. (348)

i
■

Binz, C. (1878) Uber den Traum, Bonn. (86)
Bloch, I. (1902-3) Beitrage zur Atiologie der Psychopathia sexualis (2 vols.),

Dresden. (307)

'

Bolsche, W. (1911-13) Das Liebesleben in der Natur (2 vols.), Jena.

'

(354)
Breuer, J., and Freud, S. (1893) See Freud, S. (1893a)
(1895) See Freud, S. (1895d)
.
Brill, A. A. (1912) Psychanalysis: its Theories and Practical Application,

1

,

(

1

'

t

I

1

Philadelphia and London. (2nd ed., 1914; 3rd ed., 1922.)
(31, 52-3, 55)
Darwin, C. (1872) The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals,
London. (2nd ed., 1899.) (396, 399)
(1958) The Autobiography of Charles Darwin, London. (76)
Du Prel, C. (1885) Die Philosophic der Mystik, Leipzig. (133)
Fechner, G. T. (1860) Elemente der Psychophysik, Leipzig. (2nd ed.,
1889.) (90)
.
.
Federn, P. (1914) ‘Uber zwei typische Traumsensationen’, Jb. psychoan.,
6, 89. (155)
Ferenczi, S. (1913) ‘Entwicklungsstufen des Wirklichkeitssinnes ’, Int.
Z- (arztl.') Psychoanal., 1, 124. (351)
[Trans.: ‘Stages in the Development of the Sense of Reality’,
First Contributions to Psycho-Analysis, London, 1952, Chap. VIII.]
Fliess, W. (1906) Der Ablauf des Lebens, Vienna. (320)
Freud, S. (1877a) ‘Uber den Ursprung der hinteren Nervenwurzeln im
Riickenmarke von Ammocoetes (Petromyzon Planeri) ’, S.B. Akad.
Wiss. Wien (Math.-Naturwiss. KI.), Ill Abt., 75, 15. (340)
(1878a) ‘Uber Spinalganglien und Riickenmark des Petromyzon’,
S.B. Akad. Wiss. Wien (Math.-Naturwiss. KI.), Ill Abt., 78, 81.
(340)
(1885d) ‘Zur Kenntnis der Olivenzwischenschicht’, Neurol. Zbl-> 4,
Nr. 12, 268. (393)
(1886&) With Darkschewitsch, L., ‘Uber die Beziehung des
Strickkorpers zum Hinterstrang und Hinterstrangskem nebst
Bemerkungen uber zwei Felder der Oblongata’, Neurol. Zbl-> 5,
Nr. 6, 121. (393)
(1886c) ‘Uber den Ursprung des Nervus acusticus’, Mschr. Ohrenheilk., Neue Folge 20, Nr. 8, 245, and 9, 277. (393)
(1888-9) Translation with Introduction and Notes of H. Bemheim’s De la suggestion et de ses applications d. la therapeutique, Paris,
1886, under the title Die Suggestion und ihre Heilwirkung, Vienna.
(448-9)
[Trans.: Introduction to Bernheim’s Die Suggestion und ihre Heilwirkung, C.P., 5,11; Standard Ed., 1.]
(1889a) Review of Forel’s Der Hypnotismus, Wien. med. Wschr., 39,
Nr. 28, 1097, and Nr. 47, 1892. (462)
[Trans.; Standard Ed., 1.]

।
:

i

|
!
■
.
J
'

|
।
1
'

1
1

’

i

I
466

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Freud, S. (cont.)

(1892a) Translation of H. Bernheim’s Hypnotisms, suggestion etpsychotherapie: 6tud.es nouvelles, Paris, 1891, under the title Neue Studien
uber Hypnotismus, Suggestion und Psychotherapie, Vienna. (449)
(1892-3) ‘Ein Fall von hypnotischer Heilung nebst Bemerkungen
fiber die Entstehung hysterischer Symptome durch den “Gegenwillen” ’, G.S., 1, 258; G.W., 1, 3. (72, 141, 449)
•
[Trans.: ‘A Case of Successful Treatment by Hypnotism’, C.P.,
5, 33; Standard Ed., 1.]
(1893a) With Breuer, J., ‘Uber den psychischen Mechanismus
hysterischer Phanomene: Vorlaufige Mitteilung’, G.S., 1, 7;
G,W., 1, 81. (257, 275)
_
[Trans.: ‘On the Psychical Mechanism of Hysterical Phenomena:
Preliminary Communication’, C.P., 1, 24; Standard Ed., 2, 3.]
(1893/) ‘Charcot’, G.S., 1, 243; G.W., 1, 21. (145)
[Trans.: ‘Charcot’, C.P., 1, 9; Standard Ed., 3, 9.]
(1894a) ‘Die Abwehr-Neuropsychosen’, G.S., 1, 290; G.IK., 1, 59.
(215, 336, 357)
[Trans.: ‘The Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’, C.P., 1,59; Standard
Ed., 3, 43.]
(18956 [1894]) ‘Uber die Berechtigung, von der Neurasthenic einen
bestimmten Symptomenkomplex als “Angstneurose” abzutrennen’, G.S., 1, 306; G.W., 1, 315. (386, 392, 398, 400)
[Trans.: ‘On the Grounds for Detaching a Particular Syndrome
from Neurasthenia under the Description “Anxiety Neurosis” ’,
C.P., 1, 76; Standard Ed., 3, 87.]
(1895c [1894]) ‘Obsessions et phobies’ [in French], G.S., 1, 334;
G.W., 1, 345. (400)
[Trans.: ‘Obsessions and Phobias’, C.P., 1, 128; Standard Ed., 3,
71.]
.
(1895d) With Breuer, J., Studien uber Hysterie, Vienna. G.S., 1, 3;
G.M7., 1, 77 (omitting Breuer’s contributions). (141, 257, 269,
274, 275, 279-80, 286, 292, 293-4, 296, 396, 431, 449)
[Trans.: Studies on Hysteria, London, 1956; Standard Ed., 2. In­
cluding Breuer’s contributions.]
(1895/) ‘Zur Kritik der “Angstneurose” ’, G.S., 1, 343; G.W., 1,
357. (245, 347, 386, 392)
.
[Trans.: ‘A Reply to Criticisms of my Paper on Anxiety Neurosis’,
C.P., 1, 107; Standard Ed., 3, 121.]
(18966) ‘Weitere Bemerkungen uber die Abwehr-Neuropsychosen’,
G.S., 1, 363; G.W., 1, 379. (268)
[Trans.: ‘Further Remarks on the Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’,
C.P., 1, 155; Standard Ed., 3, 159.]
(1896c) ‘Zur Atiologie der Hysterie’, G.S., 1,404; G. W., 1,425. (6)
[Trans.: ‘The Aetiology of Hysteria’, C.P., 1, 183; Standard Ed.,
3, 189.]
.
(18976) Inhaltsangaben der wissenschaftlichen Arbeiten des Privatdozenten
Dr. Sigm. Freud (1877-1897), Vienna. G. W., 1,463. (141,340,393)

I

BIBLIOGRAPHY

467

Freud, S. (cent.)

[Trans.: Abstracts of the Scientific Writings of Dr. Sigm. Freud
(1877-1897), Standard Ed., 3, 225.]
(1898a) ‘Die Sexualitat in der Atiologie der Neurosen’, G.S., 1,439;
G.W., 1,491. (386, 391)
[Trans.: ‘Sexuality in die Aetiology of the Neuroses’, C.P., 1,
220•, Standard Ed., 3, 261.]
(1899a) ‘Uber Deckerinnerungen’, G.S., 1,465; G. W., 1,531. (201)
[Trans.: ‘Screen Memories’, C.P., 5, 47; Standard Ed., 3, 301.]
(1900a) Die Traumdeutung, Vienna. G.S., 2-3; G.W., 2-3. (75,
83-239 passim, 272, 287, 315, 329, 335, 342, 397, 428, 429)
[Trans.: The Interpretation of Dreams, London and New York,
1955; Standard Ed., 4-5.]
(1901a) Uber den Traum, Wiesbaden. G.S., 3, 189; G.W., 2-3,
643. (122)
[Trans.: On Dreams, London and New York, 1951; Standard Ed.,
5, 633.]
(1901 b) Zur Psychopathologie des Alltagslebens, Berlin, 1904. G.S., 4,3;
G.W., 4. (4, 25-79 passim, 107, 111, 201, 202)
[Trans.: The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, Standard Ed., 6.]
(1904a) ‘Die Freud’sche psychoanalytische Methode’, G.S., 6, 3;
G.W., 5, 3. (287)
[Trans.: ‘Freud’s Psycho-Analytic Procedure’, C.P., 1, 264;
Standard Ed., 7, 249.]
(1905a) ‘Uber Psychotherapie’,G.S., 6,11; G.PE, 5,13. (6,450,451)
[Trans.: ‘On Psychotherapy’, C.P., 1, 249; Standard Ed., 7, 257.]
(1905c) Der Witz und seine Beziehung zum Unbewussten, Vienna. G.S.,
9, 5; G.W., 6. (39, 118, 122, 172, 174-5, 197, 235, 236)
[Trans.: Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious, London, 1960;
Standard Ed., 8.]
(1905rf) Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, Vienna. G.S., 5, 3;
G.W., 5, 29. (200, 303, 310, 323, 348, 373, 407, 415)
[Trans.: Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, London, 1962;
Standard Ed., 7, 125.]
(1905c [1901]) ‘Bruchstuck einer Hysterie-Analyse’, G.S., 8, 3;
G.W., 5, 163. (156, 185, 222, 384-5, 431)
[Trans.: ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’, C.P.,
3, 13; Standard Ed., 7, 3.]
(1906a) ‘Meine Ansichten uber die Rolle der Sexualitat in der
Atiologie der Neurosen’, G.S., 5, 123; G.W., 5, 149. (246, 386)
[Trans.: ‘My Views on the Part played by Sexuality in the
Aetiology of the Neuroses’, C.P., 1, 272; Standard Ed., 7, 271.]
(19076) ‘Zwangshandlungen und Religionsiibung’, G.S., 10,
210; G.W., 7, 129. (263, 273, 309)
[Trans.: ‘Obsessive Actions and Religious Practices’, C.P., 2,
25; Standard Ed., 9, 116.]
(1908a) ‘Hysterische Phantasien und ihre Beziehung zur
Bisexualitat’, G.S., 5,246; G.W., 7, 191. (99, 371)

!

BIBLIOGRAPHY

468
Freud, S. (amt.)

'

■
,

|
*
I

1

1
!
'■

।

[Trans.: ‘Hysterical Phantasies and their Relation to Bisexu­
ality’, C.P., 2, 51; Standard Ed., 9, 157.]
(19085) ‘Charakter und Analerotik’, G.S., 5,261; G.W., 7, 203.
(315)
.
,
[Trans.: ‘Character and Anal Erotism’, C.P., 2, 45; Standard
Ed., 9, 169.]
(1908c) ‘Uber infantile Sexualtheorien’, G.S., 5, 168; G.W., 7,
171. (317)
[Trans.: ‘On the Sexual Theories of Children’, C.P., 2, 59;
Standard Ed., 9, 207.]
(1908d) ‘Die “kulturelle” Sexualmoral und die modeme Nervositat’, G.S., 5, 143; G.W., 7, 143. (310)
[Trans.: ‘ “Civilized” Sexual Morality and Modem Nervous
Illness’, C.P., 2, 76; Standard Ed., 9, 179.]
(1908c [1907]) ‘Der Dichter und das Phantasieren’, G.S., 10,
229; G.W., 7, 213. (99, 371, 377)
[Trans.: ‘Creative Writers and Day-Dreaming’, C.P., 4, 173;
Standard Ed., 9, 143.]
(1909a) ‘Allgemeines uber den hysterischen Anfall’, G.S., 5, 255;
G.W., 7, 235. (382, 384, 396)
[Trans.: ‘Some General Remarks on Hysterical Attacks’, C.P., 2,
100; Standard Ed., 9, 229.]
(19095) ‘Analyse der Phobie eines fiinfjahrigen Knaben’, G.5., 8,
129; G.W., 7, 243. (176, 310, 317, 364, 400)
[Trans.: ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’, C.P., 3,
149; Standard Ed., 10, 3.]
(1909</) ‘Bemerkungen uber einen Fall von Zwangsneurose’, G.S.,
8, 269; G.W., 7, 381. (85, 261, 266, 301, 337)
[Trans.: ‘Notes upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis’, C.P., 3,
293; Standard Ed., 10, 155.]
(1910a [1909]) Uber Psychoanalyse, Vienna. G.S., 4, 349; G.W., 8, 3.
(6, 83, 294, 377)
[Trans.: ‘Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis’, Amer. J. Psychol., 21
(1910), 181; Standard Ed., 11, 3.]
(1910J) ‘Die zukiinftigen Chancen der psychoanalytischen Therapie’, G.S., 6, 25; G.W., 8, 104. (164, 291)
[Trans.: ‘The Future Prospects of Psycho-Analytic Therapy’,
C.P., 2, 285; Standard Ed., 11,141.]
(1910c) ‘“Uber den Gegensinn der Urworte”’, G.S., 10, 221;
G.kK., 8, 214. (179)
[Trans.: ‘ “The Antithetical Meaning of Primal Words” ’, C.P.,
4, 184; Standard Ed., 11, 155.]
(1910/) Letter to Dr. Friedrich S. Krauss on Anthropophyteia, G.S.,
11, 242; G.W., 8, 224. (162)
[Trans.: Standard Ed., 11, 233.]
(19105) ‘Uber einen besonderen Typus der Objektwahl beim
Manne’, G.S., 5, 186; G.W., 8, 66. (330)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

469

Freud, S. (cont.)

i
L
।

[Trans.: ‘A Special Type of Choice of Object made by Men’,
C.P., 4, 192; Standard Ed.. 11, 165.]
(1910i) ‘Die psychogene Sehstorung in psychoanalytischer Auffassung’, G.S., 5, 310 ; G.W., 8, 94. (308)
[Trans.: ‘The Psycho-Analytic View of Psychogenic Disturbance
of Vision’, C.P., 2, 105; Standard Ed., 11, 211.]
(1910AQ ‘Uber “wilde” Psychoanalyse’, G.S., 6, 37; G.PK, 8, 118.
(391)
[Trans.: ‘ “Wild” Psycho-Analysis’, C.P., 2, 297; Standard Ed.,

'

11,221.]

I

I
I

1

i

,

•

(19116) ‘Formulierungen uber die zwei Prinzipien des psychischen
Geschehens’, G.S., 5, 409; G.W., 8, 230. (190, 355, 357, 377)
[ Trans.: ‘Formulations on the Two Principles of Mental Function­
ing’, C.P., 4, 13; Standard Ed., 12, 215.]
(1911c) ‘Psychoanalytische Bemerkungen uber einen autobiographisch beschriebenen Fall von Paranoia (Dementia Para­
noides)’, G.S., 8, 355; G.W., 8, 240. (166, 422, 424)
[Trans.: ‘Psycho-Analytic Notes on an Autobiographical Account
of a Case of Paranoia (Dementia Paranoides)’, C.P., 3, 387;
Standard Ed., 12, 3.]
(191 le) ‘Die Handhabung der Traumdeutung in der Psychoanalyse’, G.S., 6, 45; G.W., 8, 350. (184)
[Trans.: ‘The Handling of Dream-Interpretation in PsychoAnalysis’, C.P., 2, 305; Standard Ed., 12, 91.]
(19126) ‘Zur Dynamik der Ubertragung’, G.S., 6,53; G.W., 8,364.
(149, 287, 292, 374, 431)
[Trans.: ‘The Dynamics of Transference’, C.P., 2, 312; Standard
Ed., 12, 99.]
(1912c) ‘Uber neurotische Erkrankungstypen’, G.S., 5, 400; G.kK.,
8, 322. (350)
[Trans.: ‘Types of Onset of Neurosis’, C.P., 2, 113; Standard Ed.,

I

12,229.]

(1912/) ‘Zur Onanie-Diskussion’, G.S., 3, 324; G.W., 8, 332.
(317)
[Trans.: ‘Contributions to a Discussion on Masturbation’,
Standard Ed., 12, 243.]
(1912-13) Totem und Tabu, Vienna. 1913. G.S., 10, 3; G.M7., 9.
(254, 267, 332, 335, 355)
[Trans.: Totem and Taboo, London, 1950; New York, 1952;
Standard Ed., 13, 1.]
(1913a) ‘Ein Traum als Beweismittel’, G.S., 3, 267; G.jy., 10, 12.
(182, 222, 227)
[Trans.: ‘An Evidential Dream’, C.P., 2, 133; Standard Ed., 12,
269.]
(1913c) ‘Weitere Ratschlage zur Technik der Psychoanalyse: I.
Zur Einleitung der Behandlung’, G.S., 6, 84; G.W., 8, 454.
(287)

1

I

BIBLIOGRAPHY

470
Freud, S. (con/.)

[Trans.: ‘On Beginning the Treatment (Further Recommenda­
tions on the Technique of Psycho-Analysis, I)’, C.P., 2, 342;
Standard Ed., 12, 123.]
(1913J) ‘Das Interesse an der Psychoanalyse’, G.S., 4, 313; G.W.,
8, 390. (377)
[Trans.: ‘The Claims of Psycho-Analysis to Scientific Interest’,
Standard Ed., 13, 165.]
(1914c) ‘Zur Einfiihrung des Narzissmus’, G.S., 6, 155; G.W., 10,
138. (390, 414-15, 416, 426, 428, 429)
[Trans.: ‘On Narcissism: an Introduction’, C.P., 4, 30;
Standard Ed., 14, 69.]
(1914c/) ‘Zur Geschichte der psychoanalytischen Bewegung’,
G.S., 4, 411; G.W., 10, 44. (83, 245, 286, 292, 346)
[Trans.: ‘On the History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’,
C.P., 1, 287; Standard Ed., 14, 3.]
(1914g) ‘Weitere Ratschlage zur Technik der Psychoanalyse: II.
Erinnem, Wiederholen und Durcharbeiten’, G.S., 6, 109; G.W.,
10, 126. (444)
.
[Trans.: ‘Recollecting, Repeating and Working-Through
(Further Recommendations on the Technique of Psycho­
Analysis, II)’, C.P., 2, 366; Standard Ed., 12, 147.]
(1915a) ‘Weitere Ratschlage zur Technik der Psychoanalyse: III.
Bemerkungen liber die Ubertragungsliebe’, G.S., 6, 120; G.W.,
10, 306. (431)
[Trans.: ‘Observations on Transference-Love (Further Recom­
mendations on the Technique of Psycho-Analysis, III)’, C.P., 2,
377; Standard Ed., 12, 159.]
(1915c) ‘Triebe und Triebschicksale’, G.S., 5, 443; G.W., 10, 210.
(323, 350, 360, 375, 415, 428)
[Trans.: ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’, C.P., 4, 60; Standard
Ed., 14, 111.]
(1915<Z) ‘Die Verdrangung’, G.S., 5,466; G.W., 10,248. (286,404,
410)
[Trans.: ‘Repression’, C.P., 4, 84; Standard Ed., 14, 143.]
(1915c) ‘Das Unbewusste’, G.S., 5, 480; G.W., 10, 264. (22, 286,
297, 360, 374, 409, 410, 422)
[Trans.: ‘The Unconscious’, C.P., 4, 98; Standard Ed., 14, 161.]
(1915/) ‘Mitteilung eines der psychoanalytischen Theorie widersprechenden Failes von Paranoia’, G.S., 5, 288; G.W., 10, 234.
(267, 348, 426)
[Trans.: ‘A Case of Paranoia Running Counter to the Psycho­
Analytic Theory of the Disease’, C.P., 2, 150; Standard Ed., 14,
263.]
(1916c) ‘Eine Beziehung zwischen einem Symbol und einem Symp­
tom’, G.S., 5, 310; G.W., 10, 394. (157, 268)
[Trans.: ‘A Connection between a Symbol and a Symptom’, C.P.,
2, 162; Standard Ed., 14, 339.]

BIBLIOGRAPHY

471

Freud, S. (cent.)

(1916-17) Vorlesungen zur Einfuhrung in die Psychoanalyse, Vienna.
G.S., 7; G.W., 11.
[Trans.: Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, revised ed., Lon­
don, 1929 (A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis, New York,
1935); Standard Ed., 15-16.]
(1917a) ‘Eine Schwierigkeit der Psychoanalyse’, G.S., 10, 347;
G.W., 12, 3. (209, 285)
[Trans.: ‘A Difficulty in the Path of Psycho-Analysis’, C.P., 4,
347; Standard Ed., 17, 137.]
(1917c) ‘Uber Trieburnsetzungen insbesondere der Analerotik’,
G.S., 5,268; G.W., 10, 402. (315)
[Trans.: ‘On Transformations of Instinct as Exemplified in
Anal Erotism’, C.P., 2, 164; Standard Ed., 17, 127.]
(1917d [1915]) ‘Metapsychologische Erganzung zur Traumlehre’,
G.S., 5, 520; G.W., 10, 412. (237, 372, 419)
[Trans.: ‘A Metapsychological Supplement to the Theory of
Dreams’, C.P., 4, 137; Standard Ed., 14, 219.]
(1917c [1915]) ‘Trauer und Melancholic’, G.S., 5, 535; G.W., 10,
428. (276, 427, 428)
[Trans.: ‘Mourning and Melancholia’, C.P., 4,152; Standard Ed.,
14, 239.]
(1918a) ‘Das Tabu der Virginitat’, G.S., 5, 212; G.W., 12, 161.
(267)
[Trans.: ‘The Taboo of Virginity’, C.P., 4, 217; Standard Ed.,
11, 193.]
(19185 [1914]) ‘Aus der Geschichte einer infantilen Neurose’,
G.S., 8, 439; G.W., 12, 29. (7, 185, 363, 371,452)
[Trans.: ‘From the History of an Infantile Neurosis’, C.P., 3,
473; Standard Ed., 17, 3.]
(1919a [1918]) ‘Wege der psychoanalytischen Therapie’, G.S., 6,
136; G.W., 12, 183. (5, 290)
[Trans.: ‘Lines of Advance in Psycho-Analytic Therapy’, C.P., 2,
392; Standard Ed., 17, 159.]
(1919c?) Einleitung zu Zur Psychoanalyse der Kriegsneurosen, Vienna.
G.S., 11, 252; G.W., 12, 321. (274, 382)
[Trans.: Introduction to Psycho-Analysis and the War Neuroses,
London and New York, 1921. C.P., 5,83; Standard Ed., 17,207.]
(1919A) ‘Das Unheimliche’, G.S., 10, 369; G.W., 12, 229. (216)
[Trans.: ‘The “Uncanny” ’, C.P., 4, 368; Standard Ed., 17, 219.]
(1920g) Jenseits des Lustprinzips, Vienna. G.S., 6, 191; G.W., 13, 3.
(7, 246, 274, 374, 395, 414, 415)
[Trans.: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, London, 1961; Standard Ed.,
18, 7.]

(1921c) Massenpsychologie und Ich-Analyse, Vienna. G.S., 6, 261;
G.W., 13, 73. (7, 448)
[Trans.: Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, London and
New York, 1959; Standard Ed., 18, 69.]

472

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Freud, S. (cont.)

(1922a) ‘Traum und Telepathic’, G.S., 3, 278; G.W., 13, 165.
(223, 237)
[Trans.: ‘Dreams and Telepathy’, C.P., 4, 408; Standard Ed.,
18, 197.]

(19226) ‘Uber einige neurotische Mechanismen bei Eifersucht,
Paranoia und Homosexualitat’, G.S., 5, 387; G. W., 13,195. (457)
[Trans.: ‘Some Neurotic Mechanisms in Jealousy, Paranoia and
Homosexuality’, C.P., 2, 232; Standard Ed., 18, 223.]
(19236) Das Ich und das Es, Vienna. G.S., 6, 353; G.W., 13, 237.
(7, 175, 227, 246, 337, 407, 409, 416, 428)
[Trans.: The Ego and the Id, London and New York, 1962;
Standard Ed., 19, 3.]
(1923c) ‘Bemerkungen zur Theorie und Praxis der Traumdeutung’, G.S., 3, 305; G.W., 13, 301. (117, 238)
[Trans.: ‘Remarks on the Theory and Practice of Dream­
Interpretation’, C.P., 5, 136; Standard Ed., 19, 109.]
(1923e) ‘Die infantile Genitalorganisation’, G.S., 5, 232; G.W., 13,
293. (327)
[Trans.: ‘The Infantile Genital Organization’, C.P., 2, 244;
Standard Ed., 19, 141.]
(1924c) ‘Das okonomische Problem des Masochismus’, G.S., 5, 374;
G.W., 13, 371. (275)
[Trans.: ‘The Economic Problem of Masochism’, C.P., 2, 255;
Standard Ed., 19, 157.]
(1924<Z) ‘Der Untergang des Odipuskomplexes’, G.5., 5,423; G.W.,
13, 395. (317)
[Trans.: ‘The Dissolution of the Oedipus Complex’, C.P., 2,269;
Standard Ed., 19, 173.]
(1925d [1924]) Selbstdarstellung, Vienna, 1934. G.S., 11, 119; G.W.,
14, 33. (90, 287, 450)
[Trans.: An Autobiographical Study, London, 1935 (Autobiography,
New York, 1935); Standard Ed., 20, 3.]
(1925i) ‘Einige Nachtrage zum Ganzen der Traumdeutung’,
G.S., 3, 172; G.W., 1, 561. (211, 232)
[Trans.: ‘Some Additional Notes upon Dream-Interpretation
as a Whole’, C.P., 5, 150; Standard Ed., 19, 125.] <
(1925J) ‘Einige psychische Folgen des anatomischen Geschlechtsunterschieds’, G.S., 11, 8; G.W7., 14, 19. (246, 317, 333)
[Trans.: ‘Some Psychological Consequences of the Anatomical
Distinction between the Sexes’, C.P., 5, 186; Standard Ed., 19,
243.]
(1926<Z) Hemmung, Symptom und Angst, Vienna. G.S., 11, 23; G.W.,
14, 113. (61)
[Trans.: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, London, 1960 (The
Problem of Anxiety, New York, 1936); Standard Ed., 20, 77.]
(1926c) Die Frage der Laienanalyse, Vienna. G.S., 11, 307; G.IK, 14,
209. (6, 17, 296-7)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

'

1
■
'

,

:
1

'

I

I

i
■

’
।
|

473

Freud, S. (cont.)

[Trans.: The Question of Lay Analysis, London, 1947; Standard Ed.,
20, 179.]
(1927c) Die
cincr Illusion, Vienna. G.S., 11, 411; G.W.,
14, 325. (6)
[Trans.: The Future of an Illusion, London, 1962; New York,
1928; Standard Ed., 21, 3.]
(1927J) ‘Der Humor’, G.S., 11, 402; G.W., 14, 383. (374)
[Trans.: ‘Humour’, C.P., 5, 215; Standard Ed., 21, 159.]
(1927c) ‘Fetischismus’, G.S., 11, 395; G.W., 14, 311. (349)
[Trans.: ‘Fetishism’, C.P., 5, 198; Standard Ed., 21, 149.]
(1930a) Das Unbehagen in der Kultur, Vienna. G.S., 12, 29; G. W., 14,
421. (23, 146, 372)
[Trans.: Civilization and its Discontents, London, 1930; New York,
1961; Standard Ed., 21,59.]
(19316) ‘t)ber die weibliche Sexualitat’, G.S., 12, 120; G.W., 14,
517. (333, 370)
[Trans.: ‘Female Sexuality’, C.P., 5, 252; Standard Ed., 21, 223.]
(1931d) ‘Das Fakultatsgutachten im Prozess Halsmann’, G.S.,
12, 412; G.W., 14, 541. (338)
[Trans.: ‘The Expert Opinion in the Halsmann Case’, Standard
Ed., 21, 251.]
(1933a) Neue Folge der Vorlesungen zur Einfilhrung in die Psychoanalyse,
Vienna. G.S., 12, 151; G.W., 15, 207. (5, 6, 157, 206, 227, 239,
246, 323, 333, 347, 365, 370, 388, 392, 395, 429, 434, 461)
[Trans.: New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, London and
New York, 1933; Standard Ed., 22.]
(1937c) ‘Die endliche und die unendliche Analyse’, G.W., 16, 59.
(431, 445, 448)
[Trans.: ‘Analysis Terminable and Interminable’, C.P., 5, 316;
Standard Ed., 23.]
(1937d) ‘Konstruktionen in der Analyse’, G.W., 16, 43. (50)
[Trans.: ‘Constructions in Analysis’, C.P., 5,358; Standard Ed.,23.]
(1939a [1937-39]) Der Mann Moses und die monotheistische Religion,
G.W., 16, 103. (161, 347)
[Trans.: Moses and Monotheism, London and New York, 1939;
Standard Ed., 23.]
(1940a [1938]) Abriss der Psychoanalyse, G.W., 17, 67. (333, 338,
355, 374)
[Trans.: An Outline of Psycho-Analysis, London and New York,
1949; Standard Ed., 23.]
(19405 [1938]) ‘Some Elementary Lessons in Psycho-Analysis’
[title in English: German text], G.IK., 17, 141. (34, 277)
[Trans.: ‘Some Elementary Lessons in Psycho-Analysis’, C.P.,
5, 376; Standard Ed., 23.]
(1950a [1887-1902]) Aus den Anfangen der Psychoanalyse, London.
Includes ‘Entwurf einer Psychologic’ (1895). (201, 329-30, 357,
374, 384)

474

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Freud, S. (cont.)

[Trans.: The Origins of Psycho-Analysis, London and New York,
1954. (Partly, including ‘A Project for a Scientific Psychology’,
in Standard Ed., 1.)]
(1955c [1920]) ‘Memorandum on the Electrical Treatment of War
Neuroses’, Standard Ed., 17, 211. (382)
[German Text (unpublished): ‘Gutachten uber die elektrische
Behandlung der Kriegsneurotiker.’]
(1960a) Briefe 1873-1939 (ed. E. L. Freud), Berlin. (4-5)
[Trans.: Letters 1873-1939 (ed. E. L. Freud) (trans. T. and
J. Stem), New York, 1960; London, 1961.]
Hall, G. S. (1914) ‘A Synthetic Genetic Study of Fear’, Amer. J.
Psychol., 25, 149. (398, 411)
Hesnard, A., and R6gis, E. (1914) See R±gis, E., and Hesnard, A.
(1914)
Hildebrandt, F. W. (1875) Der Traum und seine Verwerthung fur's
Leben, Leipzig. (92-3)
Httschmann, E. (1913) Freuds Neurosenlehre, Vienna (2nd ed.). (9)
Hug-Hellmuth, H. von (1915) ‘Ein Traum der sich selbst deutet’,
Int. Z- Ifirztl.) Psychoanal., 3, 33. (136-8)
Janet, Pierre (1888) ‘Les actes inconscients et la mdmoire’, Rev.
Philosoph., 13, 238. (257)
(1913) ‘Psycho-Analysis. Rapport par M. Ie Dr. Pierre Janet’,
Int. Congr. Med., 17, Section XII (Psychiatry) (1), 13. (257)
Jodl, F. (1896) Lehrbuch der Psychologic, Stuttgart. (87)
Jones, E. (1911) ‘The Psychopathology of Everyday Life’, Amer. J.
Psychol., 22, 477. (31, 55, 56)
(1916)
Review of G. Stanley Hall’s ‘A Synthetic Genetic Study of
Fear’, Int. Z- (drztl.) Psychoanal., 4, 55. (398)
(1953)
Sigmund Freud: Life and Work, Vol. 1, London and New
York. (Page references are to the English edition.) (5, 274)
(1955) Sigmund Freud: Life and Work, Vol. 2, London and New
York. (Page references are to the English edition.) (5, 349)
Jung, C. G. (1907) Uber die Psychologie der Dementia praecox, Halle.
(52, 269)
[Trans.: The Psychology of Dementia Praecox, New York, 1909.]
Kaplan, L. (1914) Grundzilge der Psychoanalyse, Vienna. (9)
Leuret, F. (1834) Fragmens psychologiques sur la folie, Paris. (257)
Levy, L. (1914) ‘Die Sexualsymbolik der Bibel und des Taimuds’,
Z- Sexualwiss., 1, 274; 318. (162)
Lichtenberg, G. G. von (The Elder) (1853) Witzige und satirische
Einfdlle, Vol. 2 of New Enlarged Edition, Gottingen. (38-9)
Lindner, S. (1879) ‘Das Saugen an den Fingem, Lippen, etc., bei den
Kindem (Ludeln)’, Jb. Kinderheilk., N.F., 14, 68. (313-14)
Maeder, A. (1906) ‘Contributions b. la psychopathologie de la vie
quotidienne’, Archives de psychologie, 6, 148. (55)
(1908) ‘Nouvelles contributions & la psychopathologie de la vie
quotidienne’, Archives de psychologie, 7, 283. (55)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

475

Maeder, A. (cont.)

(1912) ‘Uber die Funktion des Traumes’, Jb. psychoan. psychopath.
Forsch., 4, 692. (236-7)
Maury, L. F. A. (1878) Le sommeil et les reves, Paris. (1st ed., 1861.)
(86-7, 92, 94)
Mayer, C., and Meringer, R. (1895) See Meringer, R. (1895)
Meijer, A. F. (1915) De Behandeling van Zenuwzieken door Psycho-Analyse,
Amsterdam. (9)
Meringer, R. (1895) with Mayer, C., Versprechen und Verlesen, eine
psychologisch-linguistische Studie, Vienna. (32-4, 42, 43, 49)
Nacke, P. (1899) ‘Kritisches zum Kapitel der normalen und pathologischen Sexualitat’, Arch. Psychiat., 32, 356. (416)
Nordenskjold, O., et al. (1904) Antarctic. Zwei Jahre in Schnee und Eis am
Sildpol (2 vols.), Berlin. (132-3)
[Trans. (abridged): Antarctica, London, 1905.]
Plato Republic. (146)
[Trans.: in Dialogues, Vol. 2 (tr. B. Jowett), Oxford, 1871.]
Pfister, O. (1913) Die psychanalytische Methode, Leipzig and Berlin. (9)
[Trans.: The Psychoanalytic Method, New York and London,
1917.]
Rank, O. (1909) Der Mthus von der Geburt des Heiden, Leipzig and
Vienna. (160-1)
[Trans.: The Mythyof the Birth of the Hero, New York, 1914.]
(1910a) ‘Ein Beispiel von poetischer Verwertung des Versprechens’,
Zbl. Psychoan., 1, 109. (37-8)
(19106) ‘Ein Traum der sich selbst deutet’, Jb. psychoan. pychopath.
Forsch., 2, 465. (185)
(1912a) ‘Aktuelle Sexualregungen als Traumanlasse’, Zbl. Psychoan.,
2, 596. (134)
(19126) Das Inzest-Motio in Dichtung und Sage, Leipzig and Vienna.
(208, 337)
Rjfeois, E., and Hesnard, A. (1914) La psychoanalyse des ntvroses et des
psychoses, Paris. (9)
Reik, T. (1915-16) ‘Die Pubertatsriten der Wilden’, Imago, 4,125; 189.
<
(335)
(1942) From Thirty Tears with Freud, London; New York, 1940. (5, 6)
Sachs, H. (1912) ‘Traumdeutung und Menschenkenntnis’, Jb.
psychoan. psychopath. Forsch., 3, 568. (206)
(1945) Freud, Master and Friend, Cambridge (Mass.) and London.
(Page reference is to the English edition.) (5)
Scherner, K. A. (1861) Das Leben des Traumes, Berlin. (95, 152, 153,
159)
Schubert, G. H. von (1814) Die Symbolik des Traumes, Bamberg. (163)
Sheerer, H. (1914) Problems der Mystik und ihrer Symbolik, Vienna.
(237, 304)
[Trans.: Problems of Mysticism and its Symbolism, New York, 1917.]
Sperber, H. (1912) ‘Uber den Einfluss sexueller Momente auf Entstehung und Entwicklung der Sprache’, Imago 1, 405. 167)
S.F. xvi—h h

476

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Starcke, J. (1916) ‘Aus dem Alltagsleben’, Int. Z- (arztl.) Psychoanal.,
4, 21; 98. (55)
Stekel, W. (1911) Die Sprache des Traumes, Wiesbaden. (149, 237)
StrUmpell, L. (1877) Die Natur und Entstehung der Traume, Leipzig.

(87, 90)
Toulouse, E. (1896) Emile Zola: enquete mldico-psychologique, Paris. (260)
Vienna Psychoanalytic Society, Minutes of, Vol. I, New York,

1962. (397-8)
Vold, J. Mourly (1910-12) Vber den Traum (2 vols.) [German trans, by

O. Klemm), Leipzig. (87, 92, 155, 238)
Wundt, W. (1874) Grundziige der physiologischen Psychologic, Leipzig. (87)

I

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
G.S.
= Freud, Gesammelte Schriften (12 vols.), Vienna, 1924-34
G.W.
= Freud, Gesammelte Werke (18 vols.), London, from 1940
C.P.
= Freud, Collected Papers (5 vols.), London, 1924-50
Standard Ed. = Freud, Standard Edition (24 vols.), London, from 1953
P.E.L.
= Freud, The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, Standard Ed.,
Vols. IV and V
I. of D.
•= Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams, Standard Ed., Vol. VI

477

T

INDEX OF PARAPRAXES

।

1

The source of each parapraxis is given in brackets where it is other than
Freud himself.
Bungled and Symptomatic Actions; Errors
breaking hydraulic press, 78-9
committee meeting wrongly dated, 57
husband unrecognized in street, 57-8
maiden name used to sign documents, 58
maiden name wrongly applied (Brill), 52-3
telephone call wrongly made, 78
train connection missed, 78
train wrongly taken, 77-8
wedding dress forgotten (Maeder), 58
wedding, time of, forgotten, 58

।
[
■
1
|

.

Forgetting Intentions; Lost Objects
book, present from wife, lost, 55
Caesar and Cleopatra (Bernard Shaw), 54
letter overlooked (Jones), 56
pencil, gift, lost (Dattner), 54
Roman gold medal lost, 56
t

Forgetting Names
Bisenz, 74
Italian wine, 111-12
Monaco, 111, 114
rival’s name (Jung), 52

>
r

'

Misreadings
Agamemnon for dngenommen (supposed) (Lichtenberg), 39, 70, 71
closet-house for corset-house, 70-1

Slips of the Pen and Misprints
‘Komprinz' for Kronprinz (Crown Prince), 30-1
'men’ for ‘mice or guinea-pigs’, 69-70
self-seeking for unself-seeking (Stekel), 62

.

■
1
I

Slips of the Tongue
'aufgepatzt' for aufgeputzt (trimmed) (Reitler), 35
aufzustossen (hiccough) for anzustossen (drink to) (Meringer and Mayer),
32, 43, 49, 64, 147
'apopos', 43
'begleit-digeri for begleiten (accompany) (Rank), 33, 42, 51, 172
Briefkasten (letter-box) for Briitkasten (incubator) (Meringer and Mayer),
33
'draut' for dauert (lasts) (Meringer and Mayer), 42, 47
eat and drink what / want, 35, 41, 51-2, 63
‘Eischeissweibchen', 43

478

INDEX OF PARAPRAXES

(
,

479

geruigt (inclined) for geeignet (qualified), 33, 41
Hose (drawers) for Hause (home), 63-4
Komfortabel (cab-driver) for Constable (Constable), 31
Milo of Venus (Meringer and Mayer), 32
‘on one finger’ for ‘on the fingers of one hand’, 41, 63
Parliament, sitting of, closed (Meringer), 34, 35, 40, 47, 62
Portia’s slip (Shakespeare) (Rank), 37-8
riickgratlos (spineless) for riickhaltlos (unreserved) (Lattmann), 62
‘Schwest' for Brust (breast) (Meringer and Mayer), 32
Siemens and Halske, 34
‘to her’ for ‘to the Duke’ (Schiller), 37
Versuchungen (temptations) for Versuche (experiments), 33
Vorschussmitglieder (lending members) for Vorstandsmitglieder (officers)
(Graf), 52
.
‘Vorschwein’ for Vorschein (appearance) (Meringer and Mayer), 42, 47,
63, 64, 100-1, 105

INDEX OF DREAMS
The names or descriptions in brackets are the dreamer’s followed by the
reporter’s.
Aussee, lake, trip across (Child aged 3|—Freud), 127, 129
Black-edged visiting card (Man—Freud), 197
Boys, two rows of (Schemer—Schemer), 95
Brother in box (Man—Freud), 121, 129
Brown dachshund (Medical student—Freud), 186-7
Cairo, shop in (Maury—Maury), 92, 94
Channel (English) (Woman patient—Freud), 118-19
Cherries, basket of (Child aged 22 months—Freud), 127
Church and landscape (Policeman’s wife—Dattner), 193
Church bells (Hildebrandt—Hildebrandt), 92
Clock-man (Woman patient—Freud), 234-5
Crockery broken (Hildebrandt—Hildebrandt), 93
Customs officer (Foreigner—Freud), 195-6
Dachstein (Child aged 5|—Freud), 127
Dead daughter (Woman patient—Freud), 202
Exhumed father (Patient—Freud), 188-90, 206
Explorers’ dreams (Nordenskjold; Mungo Park; George Back), 133
Extensive view (Man—Freud), 121
God in a paper cocked-hat (Little girl—Freud), 118
Grandmother’s food dream (Woman of 68—Freud), 132
Kamtnerstrasse, a walk along (Young Man—Freud), 97
Kiss in automobile (Man—Freud), 235
‘Love services’ (Elderly lady—Hug-Hellmuth), 137-9, 142, 143, 211
Low-hanging chandelier (Woman patient—Freud), 191
Murderer in railwy train (Patient—Freud), 197-8
Mustard plaster (Maury—Maury), 92
Officer in a red cap (Woman patient—Freud), 192
Orvieto wine (Maury—Maury), 92
Piano needs tuning (Young Woman—Freud), 97
Pope is dead (Freud—Freud), 94
Prater, a walk in the (Young man patient—Freud), 194-5
Pulling woman from behind bed (Man—Freud), 120—1
Tiigos (Alexander the Great—Artemidorus), 86, 236
Shape of a table (Male patient—Freud), 119-20
Sleigh bells (Hildebrandt—Hildebrandt), 93
Steep iron bridge (Man—Freud), 196-7
Strawberries (Child aged 19 months—Freud), 132
Three theatre tickets for 1 fl. 50 kr. (Woman patient—Freud), 122-5, 139—
140, 178, 219-21, 224-5
Two black trunks (Foreigner—Freud), 195
Two sisters (Man patient—Freud), 196
Uncle smoking cigarette (Patient—Freud), 186

480

INDEX OF SYMBOLS
For things symbolized see the General Index
Apples, 156
Balloons, 155, 194
Beheading, 268
Being run over, 157
Blossoms, 158
Books, 156
Bottles, 156
Boxes, 156, 161
Breaking, 267, 300
Bushes, 156

,
'

i

Cases, 156, 191
Castle, 163
Cavities, 156
Chapels, 156, 193
Chests, 156, 157, 191
Churches, 156, 193
Citadel, 163
City, 163
Climbing, 157
Cloaks, 155, 157, 193
Clocks, watches, 266, 300
Clothes, 153, 158
Clover-leaf, 163
Crafts, 157
Cupboards, 156

Fortress, 163
Fountains, 155
Fruit, 156, 158

Gardens, 158
Gates, 156, 159
Gliding, 156

Hammers, 155
Hand, 156
Hanging-lamps, 191
Hats, 155, 157
Head, 268
Hearth, 162
Hills, 158
Hollows, 156
Horseshoe, 164
House, 153, 159, 162
Instruments, 155

Jewel-case, 156
Jewels, 156

Keys, 158
King and Queen, 153, 159
Knives, 154

Daggers, 154
Dancing, 157
Departure, 153, 161
Doors, 156, 158, 159, 162

Ladders, 158, 164
Landscape, 158, 162, 193
Limbs, 156
Linen, 158

Emperor and Empress, 153, 159
Extensible pencils, 155

Materials, 156, 159-60, 167
Mouth, 156
Mushroom, 164
Mussels, 156

Falling, 267, 300
Falling out of tooth, 156, 164—5
Fire-arms, 154
Fishes, 155
Flame, 162
Fleur-de-lis, 164
Flowers, 158
Flying, 155
Flying-machines, 155
Foot, 156

Nail-files, 155
Neckties, 157-8
Ovens, 162
Overcoats, 155, 157

Paper, 156
Peaches, 156

481

482

INDEX OF SYMBOLS

Pencils, 155
Pen-holders, 155
Piano playing, 156
Pig, 164
Pillow, 267-8
Pistols, 154
Pits, 156, 195
Playing, 156
Plough, 163
Pockets, 156, 157
Posts, 154
Pulling off a branch, 156, 164, 191,
195
Pulling out of tooth, 156, 164-5

Steps, 158, 193
Sticks, 154
Stoves, 156
Suite of rooms, 197-8
Sweets, 156
Tables, 156, 158, 162, 262
Threatening with weapons, 157
Three, 154, 163-4, 193, 220
Tools, 163, 167
Train journey, 153
Treasure, 156
Trees, 154, 191
Triskeles, 164
Trunks, 156, 195
Two sisters, 196

Receptacles, 156
Reptiles, 155
Revolvers, 154
Riding, 157
Rifles, 154
Rocks, 158
Rooms, 156, 158, 162-3

Umbrellas, 154
Underclothing, 158
Uniforms, 153, 158

Sabres, 154
Sharp weapons, 154, 157
Ships, 156, 162
Shoes, 158
Sliding, 156
Slippers, 158
Small animals, 153
Small child, 157
Snails, 156
Snakes, 155
Spears, 154
Staircases, 158, 192, 195

Watches and clocks, 266, 300
Water, 153, 160-1
Watering-cans, 155
Water-taps, 155
Weapons, 154, 157, 167
Wild animals, 158
Windows, 158, 159
Wood, 156, 158, 159-60
Woods, 156, 193

Vermin, 153
Vessels, 156, 161, 267

Zeppelins, 155

GENERAL INDEX
This index includes the names of non-technical authors. It also includes
the names of technical authors where no reference is made in the text to
specific works. For references to specific technical works, the Bibliography
should be consulted.—The compilation of the index was undertaken by
Mrs. R. S. Partridge,

Abraham, K. {see also Bibliography), Analogies—cont.
415
blacksmith who escaped hanging,
Absent-mindedness, 28-9, 36, 44-6
174-5
Abstract ideas represented in
cambium layer in tree-trunk, 444
dreams, 175-6
caterpillar and butterfly, 328
Activity and passivity, 327
chemical analysis, 48-9
Actual neuroses, 385-90, 391 «.,
child’s clenched fist, 116
398, 429
criminal and sanctuary, 288
Adler, A. {see also Bibliography),
entrepreneur and capitalist, 226
380-1, 397 n. 2, 398 n. 3, 406
facade of Italian church, 181
secession of, 208 n. 1, 245 n. 2
frontier control, 234
Affect
housemaid with knowledge of
in dreams, 90-1, 214-15
Sanskrit, 165
nature of, 395-6
intercommunicating
channels
neurotic anxiety as, 395-7, 403-4,
filled with liquid, 309-10, 345
409
judge and defendant, 50-1
words and, 17, 214—15
lecture on Alexander the Great,
Aggressive impulses, 403, 407
18-19
Agoraphobia, 264, 270, 399-400,
lion and camel on cliff path, 385
460
members of theatrical company,
Alexander the Great, 18-19, 86, 236
381
Alexandrian science, 285
migrant male sex glands, 339-40
Allusion as technique of displace­
migrant nerve-cells in fish, 340
ment, 174, 233
migrant tribes, 339, 341
Altruism, 418
minerals and rocks, 390
Ambiguity, verbal, 173-4
nature reserves, 372
Ambivalence, emotional, 332, 427­
night-watchman, 129, 217
428, 451
photographic negative, 295
Amnesia {see also Forgetting)
piece of breccia, 181-2
in neurotic patients, 282-4
political article reduced to visual
infantile, 76, 199-201, 204, 210,
terms, 175-7
283, 312-13, 326
robbery on a dark night, 45-6
Amplre, A.-M., 296
small traces lead to detection of
Anaclitic (attachment) object­
murder, 27
choice, 426-7
surgical operation, 459
Anagogic dream-interpretation, 237
toothache at the dentist, 287
Anal erotism, 305, 308, 314-16,
trivial indications oflove returned,
327-9, 343
27 .
.
.
unmusical strumming on piano,
Analogies
amoeba and pseudopodia, 416,
87, 90, 128
421
watchman guarding door to
apple-tree and bean, 324-5
drawing-room, 295-7
s.f. xvi—hh*
483

i

484

GENERAL INDEX

Ananke {see also Necessity), 355, 430
Andreas-Salomi, L. {see also Biblio­
graphy), 4-5
Animal phobias, 399-400
Animals, 354, 369, 414
Anna 0., case of, 274 and n. 1,
279-80, 292
Anthropology, 165
Anticathexis, 360, 375, 381, 410-11,
437
Antithetical meaning of primal
words, 179, 229-30
Anxiety, neurotic {see also Fear;
Fright; Phobias), 7, 9-10, 245
n. 1, 246 n., 392-411, 460
and birth-trauma, 396-7, 407
and expectation, 398, 401-2
and repression, 401-4, 409-11,
425
as’affect, 395-7, 403-4, 409
as transformed libido, 401-12,
425, 430
equivalents for, 401-2
Anxiety, realistic, 393—4, 401, 404—
409, 411, 430
Anxiety-dreams, 91, 131, 214—19,
221, 272
Anxiety hysteria, 270, 289, 299,
363-4, 390, 400-1, 403, 409,
445, 447
Anxiety neurosis, 386 n. 1, 390,
392 n. 1, 398, 402, 404, 437-8
Archaic character of dreams, 180,
199-212, 223-4, 457
Aristander, 236
Arrian, 18
Art, 22, 169, 375-7
Artemidorus of Daldis {see also Biblio­
graphy), 86
Association of ideas {see also Free
Association), 46, 47 n., 63, 68,
74-5
Attention and parapraxes, 29-30,
44-6,68
Auto-erotism {see also Masturba­
tion), 235, 314, 318, 329, 355,
366, 369-70, 416
‘Avoidances’, 254
Back, G., 133
Basement and First Floor, parable
of, 352-4, 378
Bassamo (in The Merchant of Venice),
37—8

Belle Helene, la (by Offenbach), 108
Bernheim, H. {see also Bibliography),
103, 110, 277, 446,448-9
Bestiality, 208-9
Bible, the, 161-2
Biological factors, 320, 413-14
Birth
and waking equated, 88-9
hysterical symptoms imitate, 303
infantile theories of, 317 n. 4,
318-19
symbols for, 153, 160-2, 180
Birth-trauma, 396-7, 407
Bisexuality, 237
Bleuler, E., 109, 427
Bocklin, A., 172
Body, human, symbols for, 153, 159
Book of the Dead, the, 161
Boys’
relation to father, 189-90, 290,
332-3, 335-8
relation to mother, 207, 332-8
Breast
child’s relation to, 274, 313-14,
323, 327-9, 366
symbols for, 156, 158, 159
Breuer, J. {see also Bibliography),
83 n. 1
Breughel, P., 305
Brooding, obsessional, 309
Brothers and sisters
relations between, 204—5, 210
318, 325, 333-4
symbols for, 153
Briicke, E. W. von, 340
Budapest, Psycho-Analytical Con­
gress at, 5 n. 2, 290 n. 1
Bungled actions, 2&-9, 44—5, 54, 56,
67, 77-9

Caesar and Cleopatra (by G. B. Shaw),
53-4
Cases
of Anna 0., 274 and n. 1, 279-80,
292
of ‘Dora’, 156 n. 2, 185 n. 1, 222
n. 1, 384 n., 431 n.
of Elisabeth von R., 292 n. 3
of 'Little Hans', 176 n. 1, 310 n. 4,
315 n. 5, 364 400 n.
of ‘Rat Man', 266 n., 301 n. 2,
337 n. 1
of Senatsprasident Schreber, 166 and
n., 422 n., 424 n. 1 and 2

GENERAL INDEX

Cases—cont.
of‘Wolf Man’, 1, 185 n. 1, 363
371 n. 1, 452 n.
Castration
complex, 197, 208, 317-18
symbols for, 156-7, 164-5, 268
threat of, 369, 371
Cathexis, libidinal, of objects, 336
n. 2, 338
Censorship
and repression, 217, 295-7, 349
in formation of symptoms, 365
of dreams, 139-43, 146-7, 149,
168, 170, 173-4, 199, 201,211­
212,214,216-20,233,297, 360,
419, 429
of the press, 139
Chance actions {see Symptomatic
actions)
Character-traits, 260, 291, 298, 318,
378, 380-1, 398
Charcot, J.-M., 145 and n.
Charles, King, in Uhland’s poem,
197
Chemical basis of sexuality {see also
Toxic factors), 320
Childhood impressions
and phantasies, 367-70
as source of dreams, 106, 199-200,
210
forgetting of, 76, 199-201, 204,
210, 283, 312-13, 326
Children {see also Infantile)
dreams of, 91, 126-36, 213, 362
egoism of, 322—1
neuroses of, 363-4
object-choice in, 325, 327-9, 336
polymorphous perversion of, 209,
311-16, 322-6
symbols for, 153, 159
Chinese language and script, 230-1
Circumcision and castration, 165
Civilization
and psycho-analysis, 389
and the instincts, 22-3, 311-12
Claustrophobia, 399
Cleanliness, obsessional, 270, 309,
400
Clitoris, 155, 266-7, 318
Coitus interruptus, 401-2
Columbus, Christopher, 257
Combinatory paranoia, 66-7, 439
Complemental series, 347 and n.,
362, 370

485

Component instincts, 316, 323,
327-8, 343, 345, 361-2, 374
Composite structures in dreams,
171-2
Condensation
in dreams, 171-3, 178, 182-3,
188, 190, 297, 366
in jokes, 172, 235
in screen memories, 200-1
in slips of the tongue, 33, 41, 172
in symptom-formation, 359, 366,
391
Conscience, 11, 429
Consciousness
admissibility to, 293-6, 331, 342,
403, 430
nature of, 21-2
psycho-analysis returns repressed
material to, 294, 435-6, 438,
455
relation of ego to, 359-61
relation of preconscious to, 343
relation of unconscious to, 295-7,
409-10,422
Constancy, principle of, 356-7,
357 n. 1, 375 and n.
Contraries {see Opposites)
Conversion hysteria, 299, 390, 400
Copernicus, 284-5
Coprophilia, 305
Counter-will, 71-4
Creative writing, 99, 163, 166, 206,
208, 375-7
Cuneiform, deciphering of, 232
Danger and anxiety, 394-6, 399­
401, 404-10, 430
Dark, fear of, 400, 407
Darwin, Charles, 285, 396 n. 1
Dattner, B., 193 n.
Dauphin, the (son of Louis XIV),
102 and n. 2, 154
Day-dreams {see also Phantasies),
98-9, 104, 130, 138, 372-6
Day’s residues, 97, 106, 122—3, 127—
128, 131, 212, 226-7, 238, 297,
419
Death
dreams after a, 187-90, 234—5
fear of, 403
symbols for, 153, 161, 196-7
Death-instinct, 414 n. 2
Death-wish, 143-4, 189, 196, 202-6,
331, 334, 338

486

GENERAL INDEX

Defence (see also Anticathexis; Cen­
sorship; Reaction-formations;
Repression;
Sublimation),
symptoms as mechanisms of,
269, 309, 410-11
Degeneracy, 260-1, 278, 307
Delusions, 26, 84-5, 254-5, 257,
381, 427
of jealousy, 248-53, 424, 427
of observation, 428
of persecution, 26, 424—5
Dementia praecox, 269, 390, 415,
420-2, 424, 438-9, 453, 458
Determinism, 28, 106-9
Diderot, D., 337-8
Diodorus, 18
Diphasic onset of symptoms, 301
Disgust, 365-6
Displacement
by allusion, 174, 233
in dreams, 140,173-4,182-3,190,
192, 196, 218, 252, 297, 366
in memory, 200
in obsessional neurosis, 259
in symptom-formation, 366, 391
Distortion
in dreams, 114, 117, 120-1, 124,
126-43, 147-9, 168, 170-1,
180-2, 192, 201, 210-11, 213­
219, 373
in slips of the tongue, 32, 35, 42
'Dora', case of, 156 n. 2, 185 n. 1,
222 n. 1, 384 n., 431 n.
Doubt
in dreams, 178
in obsessional neurosis, 178 n. 2,
259-61, 266, 289, 290 n. 1, 292
Dowden, E., 418 n. 2
‘Dream-book’ method of dream­
interpretation, 150
Dream-content (manifest)
as product of dream-work, 120,
181-2, 236
censorship and, 138-9, 297, 310
effect of distortion upon, 114,117,
120-1, 124, 132, 134-5, 140,
181-2
relation to latent dream-thoughts,
96
113-25, 128-9, 135,
140-1, 149, 170-83,215,222-5,
228, 234, 236
Dream-interpretation
‘anagogic’, 237
by dream-books, 150

Dream-interpretation—cont.
by the dreamer, 101, 104-5,
114-15, 184-5
in antiquity, 85-7, 151, 236
technique of, 100-26, 129, 141,
149-52, 170-3, 184-6, 221-2,
228-39, 287-8, 456
Dreams (see also Anxiety-dreams)
absurdity of, 91, 96-7, 114,
124-5, 178
affect in, 90-1, 214-15
after a death, 187-90, 234—5
and sensory stimuli, 86-97, 104,
128-34, 136, 215, 238
and sleep, 88-9, 92-4, 104, 128­
131, 135, 143,217-18,297,360,
417, 419
archaic character of, 180, 199­
212, 223-4, 457
arousal, 88, 92-4, 217
as guardians of sleep, 129, 131,
143, 217, 360, 417
as psychical phenomena, 100-2,
144
.
censorship of (see Censorship)
compared to jokes, 235-6
compared to parapraxes, 84, 87,
89, 100-1, 105, 107, 110-13,
130-1, 136
compared to waking life, 89-91,
142, 174, 199
condensation in (see Condensa­
tion)
displacement in (see Displace­
ment)
distortion in (see Distortion)
during psycho-analysis, 184r-5,
237-8
egoism of, 142-3, 192, 203, 417
experimentally produced, 92
forgetting of, 84-5, 91
gaps in, 138-9
hallucinatory character of, 129,
131, 136, 213
have a sense, 83, 87, 91, 98, 100,
143, 221, 257-8, 269
indistinctness of, 84-5,91,118,139
intellectual activity in, 175-6, 182
matter-of-fact, 96-7, 106, 117,
126, 190-1
of children, 91, 126-36, 213, 362
of convenience, 134—5
of emission, 134
of one night, 177, 191

1

,
■

I
*

■
'
.

'
1

GENERAL INDEX
487
Dreams {see also Anxiety-dreams)— Egoism and narcissism differenti­
amt.
ated, 417-18
over-interpretation of, 173, 228
Ego-libido, 414 n. 2,416-22,429-30
perversion in, 210, 338
Ego-syntonic trend, 350
premonitory, 85-6
Egyptians, ancient
punishment, 219, 221
art of, 327
recurring, 91
hieroglyphics of, 179, 229-30
regression in {see Regression)
incest and, 335
speeches in, 182-3
Elisabeth von R., case of, 292 n. 3
strangeness of, 89-90, 96, 98, 168 Ellis, Havelock, 416 n. 1
symbolism in, 7, 122, 149-70, Epistemophilic instinct, 327-8
185, 193, 199, 211, 228-9, 262 Erection, symbol for, 155
triviality of, 84—5, 119-20
Erotogenic zones, 308, 314-15, 322,
typical, 272, 331
328, 388
visual imagery in, 90, 96, 121, Erotomania, 424
170, 175-7, 180, 182-3, 229
Errors, 26, 30, 57, 60, 67, 75
wish-fulfilment in {see Wish­ Euripides, 331
fulfilment)
Excitation, sums of, 356-7, 375
words in, 121, 180-1
Excretory functions, 209, 305, 308,
Dream-thoughts (latent) 96 n., 113—
314-16, 319, 323, 327
125, 128-9, 135, 140-1, 149, Exhibitionism, 306
170-83, 215, 222-5, 228, 234, Expectation and anxiety, 398,400-2
236
External world {see Reality)
Dream-work, 96, 120, 136, 141, 166,
170-83, 186, 188, 190, 199, Faeces {see also Excretory functions)
211-15, 222^, 228-9, 235-6,
equated with baby, 319
238
equated with money, 315
Du Bois-Reymond, E., 34
Fairy tales, 158-9, 166, 187, 216,
Dyspnoea, 401
219, 318
Family complex, 333-5
Economic factors, 275, 356, 374-5, Fate, 77
378, 418
Father
Education, 209, 311-12, 315,355-6,
boy’s relation to, 189-90, 290,
364-5, 408, 429, 451
332-3, 335-8
Ego
girl’s relation to, 207, 269, 273,
and onset of neurosis, 359, 380-4,
275, 333-4, 337, 370
387
Father-transference to doctor, 455-6
reaction-formations of, 375, 381
Fatigue, 28-9, 36, 44-6, 417
relation of consciousness to, 359­
Faust {Goethe), 355 n. 1
61
Fear {see also Anxiety, Fright
repressive forces of, 147, 298, 352,
Phobias)
359, 373, 380, 382, 410-12
of the dark, 398, 400, 407
resistance of, 219, 298, 437-8
of death, 403
structure and development of, 7,
of heights, 407
11, 351, 354, 357, 379, 415,
of madness, 403
428-9, 438
of solitude, 399, 407
Ego-censor, 429
of strangers, 405-7
Ego ideal, 428-9
Fechner, G. T. {see also Bibliography),
Ego-instincts {see also Self-preserva90 and n.
tion, instinct of), 346, 350-2, Fetishism, 305, 348-9
354, 359-60, 386-7, 405, 410, Fixation
412-14, 420, 430, 438, 454-7
of libido, 340-2, 344, 346-9, 352,
Ego-interest, 414 and n. 2, 417,
359-62, 364, 367, 373, 416, 421
419-20
to traumas, 273-6, 361-2, 364-6

488

GENERAL INDEX

Flaubert, G., 305
Fliegende Blatter, 28, 385
Fliess, W. {see also Bibliography),
201 n. 3, 235 n. 2, 329 n. 2,
384 n.
Flight into illness, 382
Folklore, 158-9, 167
Fontane, T., 372

Heights, fear of, 407
Heine, 52 n. 2
Helen (in Offenbach's Belle Hiline}, 108
Helmholtz, H. von, 34
Hereditary factors, 251, 254, 354-5,
361-2,374,378,408,431-2,457
Herodotus, 162
Hieroglyphics, 179, 229-30

GENERAL INDEX
Infantile {see also Childhood; Chil­
dren)
amnesia, 76, 199—201, 204, 210,
283, 312-13, 326
masturbation, 325
narcissism, 204, 210, 424, 429,
446, 455
phobias, 405-9
gPYiial
1Q1—9 990
hi

489

Leuret, F. {see also Bibliography), 257
Libido {see also Sexual instinct)
adhesiveness of, 348, 455
development of, 320—40, 345-57,
379-80
fixation of, 340-2, 344, 346-9,
352, 359-62, 364, 367, 373,
416, 421
narr'i’ceicti'r' Al A i O A1C OO

490

i

!
'
’

.
1

1

।
1
!

'
,
,

,
I

GENERAL INDEX

Megalomania, 415, 424
Meinl, J., 247
Melancholia, 276 and n. 2, 427,
438-9
Melissa of Corinth, 162
Memory (see also Amnesia; For­
getting;
Mnemotechnics;
Screen memories), 74-5, 200,
367, 435, 452-3
Men, symbols for, 153, 157-8
Menopause, 403
Merchant of Venice, the, 37-8
Micturition (see also Excretory func­
tions), 315, 319, 327
Migraine as cause of parapraxes,
28-9, 36,45
Mishearing, 25, 67
Mislaying, 25-6,44,54-7,60,67,77
Misprints, 30-1
Misreading, 25, 31, 44, 67,70-1
Mnemotechnics, 75
Molilre, 281
Morality, 142-3, 147, 211, 331-2,
431, 434
Moses, 11, 19, 161
Mother as child’s love-object, 207,
329-38,407
Motility, 359, 394-5
Mourning, 276
Munich, 135, 186
Myths, 158, 160-2, 164, 165-7, 169,
172, 335, 389

Nakedness, symbols for, 153, 158
Names
distortion of, in parapraxes, 74-6,
110-12, 114
experiments with, 107-8
forgetting of, 25, 28-30, 52-3, 60,
67
Nancy, 103, 448
Narcissism, 7, 414 n. 2, 416-18
and egosm differentiated, 417-18
and homosexuality, 426-7
infantile, 204, 210, 424, 429, 446,
455
ofsleep, 417, 420-1
Narcissistic
identification, 427-8
libido, 414 n. 2, 416-22, 429-30,
447
object-choice, 426
Necessity, 355, 357, 412, 430
Necrophilia, 305-6

Negative does not exist in dreams,
178
Nestroy, J., 321
352
Neurasthenia, 17, 390
Neuroses (see also Actual neuroses;
Anxiety neurosis; Children,
neuroses of; Hysteria; Narcis­
sistic neuroses; Obsessional
neurosis; -Transference neu­
roses; Traumatic neuroses;
War neuroses)
and fixation of libido, 346, 348-9,
352
and frustration, 346, 348-9, 352
and tendency to conflict, 352-4,
378
curability of, 457
medical view of, 450
‘
Oedipus complex as nucleus of,
329, 332, 335, 337, 341
onset of, 349,359,363,380-4,387
precipitating cause of, 382, 391,
453
predisposition to, 347, 364-6, 406
prevention of, 364-5
sexual aetiology of, 22,246 n., 264,
269, 298-301, 319,-328, 339,
348-52, 362-3, 380-403, 433
theory of, 83, 168, 185, 222, 239,
243, 291-2, 375, 379-81
traumatic aetiology of, 246 n.,
273-6, 346-7
Neurotic symptoms (see Symptoms)
Neurotics
characteristics of, 260, 291, 298,
318, 378, 380-1
compared to normal persons,
297-8, 456-7
psycho-analysis of, 15,167-8,300,
307, 326-7, 335, 453-4
tendency to transference in, 439­
446
Neveu de Rameau, le (by Diderot),
337-8
Nimrod, 19
Normal persons
compared to neurotics, 297-8,
456-7
dreams of, 83—4, 98, 185, 297-8,
456-7
mental processes of, 368
sexual development in, 309-10,
317-19, 322-3, 339, 386, 391,
415

GENERAL INDEX

Numbers
as symbols, 163-4, 220
experiments with, 107
in dreams, 182
Nutritive instinct, 313-14, 328-9

J
.
>

]
'

j

।

491

Opposites
imply no contradiction, 76-7,259,
301
representation by, in dreams (see
Reversal)
substitution of, in parapraxes,
33-4, 41
Oral erotism, 305,308,313-14,316,
327-9
Organic illness, 291, 417, 419-20
Organ-pleasure, 323-5, 328
Orgasm, 321-2, 324
Orifices, bodily, symbols for, 158,159
Over-interpretation of dreams, 173,
228
Ovid, 215 and n. 1

Oberlander, A., 385
Object-choice
anaclitic (attachment), 426-7
at puberty, 336-7
development of, 329, 345-6
in children, 325, 327-9, 336
incestuous, 329,336-7,341,343-4
mother’s breast as prototype of,
314, 328-9
narcissistic, 426
perverted, 304-8, 327, 348, 426-7
regressive, 341, 343-4, 361, 365
Palpitations as hysterical symptom,
Object-libido, 416-22, 424, 427,
401
446-7, 453-5
Pantheism, 20 n. 1
lack of, in psychosis, 415-16
Paranoia, 308, 381, 390, 423-9
Obscenity and parapraxes, 43
438-9, 453, 458
Obsessional
combinatory, 66-7, 439
acts, 259, 261-6, 270, 276-8,
persecutory, 424-6
282-3, 299, 308-9, 404
Paraphrenia, 390, 424
brooding, 309
Parapraxes (see also Bungled actions;
ceremonial, 259, 264-70, 278,
Errors; Forgetting; Mishear­
283, 299-301, 400
ing; Mislaying; Misreading;
cleanliness, 270, 309, 400
Slips of the pen; Slips of the
doubt, 178 n. 2, 259-61, 266, 289,
tongue), 8, 25-79, 100-5, 193,
290 n. 1, 292
456
ideas, 85, 197, 258, 278, 344,420,
and diversion of attention, 29-30,
427
44-6,68
impulses, 258-9, 278
compared to dreams, 84, 87, 89,
Obsessional neurosis, 85 n., 258-73,
100-1,105,107,110-13,130-1,
275-8, 282-4, 299-301, 309,
136
343-4, 375, 380-1
defined, 25 and n.
anxiety screened by symptoms in,
have a sense, 35-6, 40-61, 66, 87,
404
257-8,269
compared to hysteria, 258, 260,
in creative writing, 36-7, 53-4
283-4,301,343,375,381
result from conflict of intentions,
compared to the narcissistic
44, 46, 60-6, 70-4, 126
neuroses, 420-2, 447
somatic factors and, 28-30, 36,
curability of, 437-8
44-6, 60-1, 68
resistance in, 287 n., 289-90, Parental intercourse, 267-8, 299,
292
318, 369-71
transference in, 445
Parents
Octavio (in Schiller’s Wallenstein),
and children, relations between
(see also Father; Mother;
Oedipus complex, 207-8, 317 n. 5,
Oedipus complex), 189-90,
329-38, 341, 363
203-8, 210, 220, 225, 429
Offenbach’s La Belle Hillne, 108
symbols for, 157, 159
Omens and auguries, 58-9
Paris’s song in Offenbach’s Belle
O^rrt, J., 232
HiUne, 108

492

GENERAL INDEX

Park, Mungo, 133
Parricide, 335
Passions, evil, symbols for, 158
Passive sexual attitude, 327, 402
Penis-envy in girls, 318
Perception, external, 295 n. 1
Periander of Corinth, 162
Periodicity, 320
Persecution, delusions of, 26, 424—6
Persecutory paranoia, 424-6
Perversion, 7, 208-9, 301-2, 304-16,
319-26, 344, 348-9, 352, 354,
359, 416
in dreams, 210, 338
of children (polymorphous), 209,
311-16, 322-6
Pfister, 0., 233
Phallic
phase, 327 n.
symbols, 154-8, 162-4, 167, 191,
193-4, 268, 300
Phantasies (see also Day-dreams),
98-9,246 n., 268-9, 370,373-4,
453
ambitious, 98, 372
and formation of symptoms, 268269, 367, 373-4, 391
and reality, 70, 367-72, 374-6
hysterical, 9-10, 381
primal, 7, 369-71, 371 n. 1
psychotic, 453
retrospective, 336, 367-72
seduction, 370-1
sexual, 301, 306, 309, 314, 370-1
unconscious, 373, 376, 391
wish-fulfilment in, 98, 372
Philosophy, 20, 97-8
Phobias (see also Agoraphobia;
Claustrophobia), 398-9, 403,
405, 407-11
animal, 399-400
hysterical, 409
infantile, 405-9
railway, 399-400, 407
Phylogenetic inheritance, 199, 354355, 371,378,406, 411
Piccolomini, Max (in Schiller’s Wal­
lenstein}, 36-7
Pleasure principle, 75 n. 2, 314-15,
356-7, 359, 375, 382, 395
and reality principle, 357, 366,
371-2
Plutarch, 18, 236
Poincari, President, 43

Portia (in The Merchant of Venice),
37-8
Preconscious system, 235, 296-7,
342-3, 360, 373, 433
Pregenital sexuality, 327-8
Prehistoric man, 406
‘Pressure’ technique, 292 n. 3
Primal
phantasies, 7, 369-71, 371 n. 1
scene (see Parental intercourse)
Primitive man, 254, 335, 406
Prisoner’s Dream, the (picture by
Schwind), 135
‘Prospective purpose’ in dreams
(Maeder), 236-7
Psychiatry, 16-17,20-1, 250-1, 260,
278, 423-4
and psycho-analysis, 254-5, 257,
423
Psycho-analysis
and civilization, 389
and psychiatry, 254-5, 257, 423
and religion, 167, 169, 389
criticisms of, 15-16, 21-2, 26-7,
48-9, 79, 151-2, 169, 207, 233,
244-6, 284-5, 329, 380, 461-2
lifting of repressions in, 296, 435438, 445, 447, 450-3
obstructed by patient’s relatives,
458-62
of neurotics, 15, 167-8, 300, 307,
326-7, 335, 453-4
resistance to (see Resistance)
therapeutic aspect of, 7, 15, 20,
255-8, 261, 279-81, 287, 299,
384, 431-9, 443-63
uncovers unconscious mental pro­
cesses, 389, 435-6, 438, 445,
454-5
Psycho-analytic technique (see also
Free association; Pressure tech­
nique), 6, 17-19, 49, 83, 101,
221, 389, 452, 457-61
‘fundamental rule’ of, 115 and n.,
287 and n., 288-9, 440
Psycho-Analytical Congress at
Budapest, 5 n. 2, 290 n. 1
Psychology, experimental, 20
Psychoneuroses (see Neuroses)
Psychoses (see also Dementia praecox; Manic depressive states;
Melancholia; Paranoia; Para­
phrenia), 257, 260, 415, 422 n.,
423, 429-30, 457 n.

)

GENERAL INDEX
Puberty, 190, 208, 311-12, 317, 319,
327, 329, 336, 348, 353, 365,
369, 403
-rites, 165, 335
Pubic hair, symbols for, 156
Punishment dreams, 219, 221

.

*

'
1

i
i

Quality, 374-5, 457
Quantity, 356, 358, 373-5, 418 n. 1,
457
Questenberg (in Schiller's Wallenstein),
37
Railway phobia, 399-400, 407
Rank, O. (see also Bibliography), 5,
168
'Rat Man', case of, 266 n., 301 n. 2,
337 n.
Rawlinson, H. C., 232
Reaction-formations of the ego,
375, 381
Reality
and anxiety, 393-4, 401, 404-9,
411,430
and phantasy, 367-8
frustration by, 314-15, 355, 359
-principle, 357, 366, 371-2, 412,
416
-testing, 372
Regression
and repression, 341-4
in dreams, 180-1, 183, 185, 199,
210-12, 223-4
of libido, 339-44, 359-66, 373-4,
409-12
of the ego, 357
two kinds of libidinal, 343
Reitler, R., 57 n.
Relatives of patient obstruct psycho­
analysis, 458-62
Religion, 28, 167, 169, 332, 389
Repeat, compulsion to, 7, 270, 274
Repression
and anxiety, 401-4, 409-11, 425
and censorship, 217, 295-6, 344
and dreams, 217-18, 226, 297,
419, 429, 456-7
and regression, 341-4
and symptom-formation, 294,
297-301, 359-61, 365, 456-7
as exclusion from consciousness,
293-6, 331, 342, 403, 430
as function of the ego, 147, 298,
352, 359, 373, 380, 382,410-12

493
Repression—cont.
demonstrated by resistance, 294,
379, 384, 436-8, 447
forgetting as outcome of, 326
lifting of, in creative art, 376
lifting of, in psycho-analysis,
435-8, 445, 447, 450-3
process of, compared to that of
dementia praecox, 421
theory of, 286 n. 1, 294-8, 379-80
Reproductive function, 303-4, 311,
316, 319-22, 324, 328, 339,
345
Resistance
and character-traits, 291,298,318
and transference, 290-1, 291 n. 2,
440,443
demonstrates repression, 294, 379,
384, 436-8, 447
in narcissistic neuroses, 423
intellectual, 284, 292-3
of ego, 291, 298, 437-8
overcoming of, in psycho-analysis,
291, 437-8, 445, 447, 451-3,
458-9
to dream-interpretation, 115-17,
119, 141, 143-7
to findings of psycho-analysis (see
Psycho-analysis, criticisms of)
to psycho-analysis, 252-3,286-94,
298, 350, 461-2
Revenge, 143
Reversal, as a means of representa­
tion in dreams, 178, 180, 190,
192, 219, 228-9
Roux, W., 361
Royal Asiatic Society, The, 232

Sachs, H. (see also Bibliography),
168
Sadism, 306, 309, 327-8, 343
Salzburg, 5
Sargon of Agade, King, 160-1
Schelling, F., 20 n. 1
Schiller, F., 31, 36-7
Schreber, Senatsprasident, case of, 166
and n., 422
424 n. 1 and 2
Schwind, M. von, 135
Scopophilia, 220,225,306,309,322,
325, 327-8, 369
Screen memories, 200-1
Secondary revision, 182, 381, 403
Seduction, 369-70
phantasies, 370-1

494

GENERAL INDEX

Self-preservation, instinct of, 351,
384, 394,408,411-13,414 n. 2,
429?30
Self-punishment, 77
Sensory stimuli (see Stimuli)
Sensual excitement, symbols for, 158
Sex-distinction, infantile view of,
317-18
Sexual abstinence and neuroses,
434-5
Sexual aetiology of the neuroses, 22,
246 n., 264, 269, 298-301, 319,
328, 339, 348-52, 362-3, 380403, 433
Sexual aim, 23, 305, 307, 322-3,
325,329, 375
Sexual anaesthesia in women, 318,
402
Sexual freedom (a 'full life’) versus
asceticism, 432-5
Sexual instinct (see also Libido),
22-3, 134, 142, 303-19, 345-6
in conflict with ego-instincts, 346,
350-2,354,386-7,405,412-14,
420, 438, 454-7
Sexual intercourse, 303, 305, 316,
322-4, 326, 356, 391
infantile theories of, 318-19
parental, 267-8, 299, 318, 369-71
symbols for, 157-8, 164, 167,
192-5
Sexual phantasies, 301, 306, 309,
314, 370-1
Sexual researches ofchildren, 191-2,
220, 225, 317-19, 326, 334
Sexual symbolism, 153-67, 188,
190-5, 266-8, 300
Sexual theories of children, 191,
192 n., 209, 317 n. 4, 318-19
Sexuality
definition of, 303-5, 320-1, 324-5
normal, 309-10, 317-19, 322-3,
339, 386, 391, 415
pregenital, 327-8
Shakespeare, 37-8, 96, 161, 335
Shaw, G. B., 53-4, 205
Siemens, W. von, 34
' Sleep
and dreams (see Dreams and
sleep; Dreams as guardians of
sleep)
and waking life, 89-91, 98
ceremonials connected with, 264270

Sleep—cont.
characteristics of state of, 88-90,
104, 417, 420-1, 456
Slips of the pen, 31, 44-5, 60, 67,
69-70
Slips of the tongue, 25-8, 30-7, 4052, 60, 62-9, 100-1, 103, 105,
. 147, 235
Social environment, 311-12, 315,
345, 429, 432, 461
Sociology and psycho-analysis, 167
Solitude, fear of, 399, 407
Solomon, Song of, 161-2
Sophocles, 330-1
Speech, origins of, 167
Speeches in dreams, 182-3
Sphinx, riddle of the, 318
Stekel, W. (see also Bibliography),
397 n. 2
Stimuli, sensory
and dreams, 86-97, 104, 128-34,
136, 215,238
and pleasure principle, 356-7,375
Strangers, fear of, 405-7
Stmwwelpeter (by Hoffmann), 369
Sublimation, 23, 345-6, 375-6, 402,
442 455
Suggestion, 31, 446-55, 462
Suicidal impulses, 427
Super-ego, 11
Symbolism
as a phylogenetic heritage, 199
in antiquity, 161-4
in creative writing, 163, 166
in dreams, 7, 122, 149-69, 170,
185, 193, 199, 211, 228-9, 262
interpretation of, 453
sexual, 153-67, 188, 190-5, 266268, 300
Symptomatic actions, 61, 107, 246248, 250, 253
Symptoms, neurotic
and repression, 294, 297-301,
359-61, 365, 456-7
as defence mechanisms, 269, 309,
410-11
as product of conflict, 349-50,
358-9
as substitute satisfactions, 280,
293-4, 297-301, 307-9, 319,
344, 350, 358-60, 365, 387,
391, 445, 454
compared to dreams, 83, 183,
224, 239,297, 360, 366

GENERAL INDEX

Symptoms, neurotic—cont.
curability of, 168, 279-81, 358,
435-6, 448-55, 462
diphasic onset of, 301
have a sense, 83, 239, 257-72,
277-9, 280-4, 378-9, 456
interpretation of, 261-71, 279,
298, 301, 307-9, 385
mechanism of, 20-1, 74—5, 255,
297,358-87, 390-1,404-6,421,
433, 445, 456-7
‘typical’, 270-2
‘whence’, ‘whither’ and ‘why’ of,
277, 284
wish-fulfilment in, 251-2, 299,
300-1, 360, 366
Taboos, 254
Talbot, W. H. Fox, 232
Tarnier, John (in Shaw's Man and
Superman), 205
Tannhauser, 321
,
Tentation de Saint Antoine, la (by
Flaubert), 305
Thirst, 132-4, 192, 215, 412
Three Wishes, the, fairy story, 216,
219
Thumb-sucking, 314, 327, 369
Totemism, 335
Toxic factors {see also Chemical basis
of sexuality), 388-9, 391, 396
Transference, 17—18, 149 n. 2,
439-47, 451-6, 462
negative, 443, 445, 451, 453
neuroses {see also Hysteria; Obses­
sional neurosis), 341, 350-1,
379, 385, 387, 390, 414-15,
420-3, 429, 445, 453
-resistance, 290-1, 291 n. 2
Trauma of birth, 396-7, 407
Traumatic
aetiology of the neuroses, 246 n.,
273-6, 346-7
neuroses, 274, 381-2
situation, 273-6, 281, 319, ,347,
361-6
Trenck, Baron, 133
Typical
dreams, 272, 331
symptoms, 270-2
Tyre, siege of, 86, 236

Uhland, J. L., 197
Uncanny, the, 399

495

Unconscious, the
and dreams, 113-14, 116,119-20,
151, 201, 222-3, 235
and repression, 294-7, 331-2,
342, 359, 379-80, 419
in normal persons, 457
meaning of the term, 7, 113,
210-12, 227, 294-5, 437, 463 n.
relation to consciousness, 295-7,
409-10, 422
Unconscious mental processes
existence of, 21-2, 101-4, 109,
143-5, 183, 223, 239, 255,
277-9, 284
uncovered by psycho-analysis,
389, 435-6, 438, 445, 454-5
Unpleasure, 75-6, 356-7, 375, 383­
384, 395-6

Vagina, 317-18
Verbal {see also Linguistic usage;
Words)
ambiguity, 173-4
assonance, 157 n. 3, 174
Vertigo, 401
Vienna
Psycho-Analytical Society {see also
Bibliography), 349 397 n.
2
University of, 5, 9
Virginity, 267, 300
symbols for, 158
Visual imagery in dreams, 90, 96,
121, 170, 175-7, 180, 182-3,
229
Vomiting, hysterical, 271
Waking life and dreams, 89-91, 98,
142, 174, 199
Wallace, A. R., 285
Wallenstein (by Schiller), 36-7
War
neuroses, 274, 382
of 1914-18, 5, 7, 16, 43, 71, 74,
137, 139, 146, 330, 462
Weaning, 366
West-ostlicher Diwan (by Goethe),
418-19
Wish-fulfilment
in bungled actions, 77-9
in dreams, 128-36, 142-9, 155,
170, 192, 194, 213-27, 238,
297, 299, 360, 419, 456
in phantasies, 98, 372

496

GENERAL INDEX

Wish-fulfilment—cont.
in symptoms, 251-2, 299, 300-1,
360, 366
'Wolf Man’, case of, 7, 185 n. 1,
363 n., 371 n. 1, 452 n.
Womb
and sleep, 88
symbols for, 156
Women
sexual development of, 155, 246
n., 253, 402
symbols for, 153, 156-63

Words (see also Linguistic usage;
Verbal)
and affect, 17, 214^15
experiments with, 109-10
in dreams, 121, 180-1
magical nature of, 17
Wundt, W. (see also Bibliography),
46, 109
Zola,
260
Zurich school, 109

)

