THE STANDARD EDITION OF

THE COMPLETE PSYCHOLOGICAL WORKS
OF SIGMUND FREUD
*

VOLUME XV

THE PRISONER’S DREAM

THE STANDARD EDITION

OF THE COMPLETE PSYCHOLOGICAL WORKS OF

SIGMUND FREUD
Translated, from, the German under the General Editorship of
JAMES STRACHEY

In Collaboration with

ANNA FREUD
Assisted by

•

ALIX STRACHEY and ALAN TYSON

VOLUME XV
(1915-1916)

Introductory Lectures on
Psycho-Analysis
(PARTS I and II)

LONDON

THE HOGARTH PRESS
AND THE INSTITUTE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

PUBLISHED BY
THE HOGARTH PRESS LIMITED
*

CLARKE, IRWIN AND CO. LTD.

TORONTO

This Edition first Published in
1961
Reprinted 1962, 1964, 1968, 1971, 1973, r975> T978 a"d 1981

o

ISBN O 7012 OO67 7

All rights reserved. No part of this publica­
tion may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form, or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photo­
copying, recording or otherwise, without the
prior permission of The Hogarth Press Ltd.
TRANSLATION AND EDITORIAL MATTER

© THE INSTITUTE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

AND ANGELA RICHARDS 1961
PRINTED AND BOUND IN GREAT BRITAIN

BY BUTLER AND TANNER LTD, FROME

CONTENTS
FIFTEEN

VOLUME

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHO-ANALYSIS
(1916—1917[1915—1917])

Editor’s Introduction
Preface [1917]
Preface to the Hebrew Translation [1930]
PART I.

page 3
9
11

PARAPRAXES (1916[1915])

Lecture
I
II
III
IV

PART II.

V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
XIII
XIV
XV

15
25
40
60

Introduction
Parapraxes
Parapraxes {continued)
Parapraxes {concluded)

DREAMS [1916[1915-16])

Difficulties and First Approaches
The Premisses and Technique of Interpretation
The Manifest Content of Dreams and the Latent
Dream-Thoughts
Children’s Dreams
The Censorship of Dreams
Symbolism in Dreams
The Dream-Work
Some Analyses of Sample Dreams
The Archaic Features and Infantilism of Dreams
Wish-Fulffiment
Uncertainties and Criticisms
VOLUME

83
100

113
126
136
149
170
184
199
213
228

SIXTEEN

PART III. GENERAL THEORY OF THE
NEUROSES (1917[1916—17])

XVI
XVII

Psycho-Analysis and Psychiatry
The Sense of Symptoms

v

234
257

vi

CONTENTS

Lecture
Fixation to Traumas—The Unconscious
page 273
Resistance and Repression
286
The Sexual Life of Human Beings
303
The Development of the Libidoand the Sexual
Organizations
320
XXII
Some Thoughts on Development and Regression—
Aetiology
339
XXIII The Paths to the Formation of Symptoms
358
XXIV The Common Neurotic State
378
XXV
Anxiety
392
XXVI The Libido Theory and Narcissism
412
XXVII Transference
431
XXVIII Analytic Therapy
448

XVIII
XIX
XX
XXI

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND AUTHOR INDEX

464

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

477

INDEX OF PARAPRAXES

478

INDEX OF DREAMS

480

INDEX OF SYMBOLS

481

GENERAL INDEX

483

FRONTISPIECE ‘The Prisoner’s Dream’ by Schwind.
(Reproduced by kind permission of the Schack Gallery,
Munich.)

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON
PSYCHO-ANALYSIS
(1916-17[1915-17])

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION
VORLESUNGEN ZUR EINFUHRUNG IN DIE
PSYCHOANALYSE

(«) German Editions:

1916 Part I (separately), Die Fehlleistungen. Leipzig and
Vienna: Heller.
1916 Part II (separately), Der Traum. Same publishers.
1917 Part III (separately), Allgemeine Neurosenlehre. Same pub­
lishers.
1917 The above, three parts in one volume. Same publishers.
Pp. viii + 545.
1918 2nd ed. (With index and inserted list of 40 corrigenda.)
Same publishers. Pp. viii + 553.
1920 3rd ed. (Corrected reprint of above.) Leipzig, Vienna
and Zurich: Internationaler Psychoanalytischer Ver­
lag. Pp. viii + 553.
1922 4th ed. (Corrected reprint of above.) Same publishers.
Pp. viii + 554. (Also Parts II and III separately,
under titles Vorlesungen uber den Traum and Allgemeine
Neurosenlehre.}
1922 Pocket ed. (No index.) Same publishers. Pp. iv +
495.
1922 Pocket ed. (2nd ed., corrected and with index.) Same
publishers. Pp. iv + 502.
1924 G.S., 7. Pp. 483.
1926 5th ed. (Reprint of G.S.} I.P.V. Pp. 483.
1926 Pocket ed. (3rd ed.) Same publishers.
1930 Small 8vo. ed. I.P.V. Pp. 501.
1933 (By licence.) Berlin: Kiepenheuer. Pp. 524.
1940 G.W., 11, Pp. 495.
3

4

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

(i) English Translations:
A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis
1920 New York: Boni & Liveright. Pp. x + 406. (Tr. un­
specified; Foreword G. Stanley Hall.)
Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
1922 London: Allen & Unwin. Pp. 395. (Tr. Joan Riviere;
without Freud’s preface; with preface by Ernest
Jones.)
1929 2nd ed. (revised). Same publishers. Pp. 395.
A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis
1935 New York: Liveright. Pp. 412. (The London ed. under
the title of the old New York one. Tr. Joan Riviere;
with prefaces by Ernest Jones and G. Stanley Hall.
Freud’s preface included.)

The present translation is a new one by James Strachey.

This book had a wider circulation than any of Freud’s
works, except, perhaps, The Psychopathology of Everyday Life.1 It
is also distinguished by the number of misprints in it. As is
recorded above, 40 were corrected in the second edition; but
there were many more, and a considerable number of slight
variations in the text may be observed in the various editions.
The present translation follows the text of the Gesammelte Werke,
which is in fact identical with that of the Gesammelte Schrifien’,
and only the more important deviations from earlier versions
have been recorded.
The actual date of publication of the three parts is not clear.
Part I was certainly out before the end of July, 1916, as is
shown by a reference to it in a letter of Freud’s to Lou AndreasSalomd ofJuly 27, 1916 (cf. Freud, 1960). In the same letter he
1 The Lectures vieie certainly the most translated of any. In Freud’s life­
time (apart from English) they appeared in Dutch (1917),French (1922),
Italian (1922), Russian (1922-3), Spanish (1923), Japanese (1928),
Norwegian (1929), Hebrew (1930), Hungarian (1932), Serbo-Croatian
(1933), Chinese (1933), Polish (1935) and Czech (1936). They had prob­
ably also appeared by then in Portuguese, Swedish, and later in Arabic.

EDITOR’S INTRODUGTON

5

also speaks of Part II as being on the point of appearing. Part
III seems to have been published in May, 1917.
The academic year of the University of Vienna fell into two
parts: a winter term (or semester) running from October to
March, and a summer one from April to July. The lectures
printed here were delivered by Freud in two successive winter
terms during the first World War: 1915-16 and 1916-17.1
The fullest account of the circumstances leading to their pub­
lication will be found in the second volume of Ernest Jones’s
biography (1955, 245 ff.).
Although, as Freud himself remarked in his preface to the
JVew introductory Lectures, his membership of the University of
Vienna had only been ‘a peripheral one’, he had nevertheless,
from the time of his appointment as Privatdozent (University
Lecturer) in 1885 and as Professor Extraordinarius (Assistant
Professor) in 1902, given many courses of University lectures.
These remained unrecorded, though some accounts of them
may be found—for instance, by Hanns Sachs (1945, 39 ff.) and
Theodor Reik (1942, 19 ff.), as well as by Ernest Jones (1953,
375 ff.). Freud decided that the series beginning in the autumn
of 1915 should be the last, and it was at Otto Rank’s suggestion
that he agreed upon their publication. In his preface to the
New Introductoiy Lectures which has just been quoted Freud tells
us that the first half of the present, earlier, series ‘were impro­
vised, and written out immediately afterwards’ and that ‘drafts
of the second half were made during the intervening summer
vacation, at Salzburg, and delivered word for word in the
following winter’. He adds that at that time he ‘still possessed a
phonographic memory’, for, however carefully his lectures
might have been prepared, his actual delivery of them was
invariably extempore2 and usually without notes. There is
general agreement upon his technique of lecturing: that he was
never rhetorical and that his tone was always one of quiet and
1 The opening lecture of the series was delivered, according to Ernest
Jones, on October 23, 1915, but according to a contemporary notice
(Int. Z- Psychoan., 3, 376) on October 16. It is agreed that they were
given on Saturdays.
1 A single exception to this rule is recorded in the case of his Budapest
Congress paper (1919a); cf. Jones (1953, 375 «.).

6

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

even intimate conversation. But it must not be supposed from
this that there was anything slovenly or disordered about his
lectures. They almost always had a definite form—a head, body
and tail—and might often give the hearer the impression of
possessing an aesthetic unity.
It has been said (Reik, 1942, 19) that he disliked lecturing,
but it is difficult to reconcile this, not only with the number of
lectures he delivered in the course of his life, but with the re­
markably high proportion of his actually published work which
is in the form of lectures. There is, however, a possible explana­
tion of this inconsistency. Examination shows that among his
publications it is predominantly the expository works that appear
as lectures: for instance, the early lecture on ‘The Aetiology of
Hysteria’ (1896c), the somewhat later one ‘On Psychotherapy’
(1905a), as well, of course, as the Five Lectures delivered in
America (1910a) and the present series. But beyond this, when,
many years afterwards, he undertook an exposition of the later
developments of his views, he, for no obvious reason, once more
threw them into lecture form and published his New Introductory
Lectures (1933a), though there was never any possibility of their
being delivered as such. Thus lectures as a method of putting
forward his opinions evidently appealed to Freud, but only
subject to a particular condition: he must be in a lively contact
with his real or supposed audience. Readers of the present
volume will discover how constantly Freud retains this con­
tact—how regularly he puts objections into his audience’s mouth
and how frequently there are imaginary arguments between
him and his hearers. He in fact carried over this method of
stating his case to some of his works which are not lectures at
all: the whole of The Question of Lay Analysis (1926c) and the
greater part of The Future of an Illusion (1927c) take the form of
dialogues between the author and a critical listener. Contrary,
perhaps, to some mistaken notions, Freud was entirely opposed
to laying down his views in an authoritarian and dogmatic
fashion: ‘I shall not tell it you’, he says to his audience at one
point below (p. 431), ‘but shall insist on your discovering it for
yourselves.’ Objections were not to be shouted down but
brought into the open and examined. And this, after all, was
no more than an extension of an essential feature of the tech­
nique of psycho-analysis itself.

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

7

The Introductory Lectures may justly be regarded as a stock­
taking of Freud’s views and the position of psycho-analysis at
the time of the first World War. The secessions of Adler and
Jung were already past history, the concept of narcissism was
some years old, the epoch-making case history of the ‘Wolf
Man’ had been written (with the exception of two passages) a
year before the lectures began, though it was not published till
later. So, too, the great series of ‘metapsychological ’ papers on
fundamental theory had been finished a few months earlier,
though only three had been published. (Two more of them
appeared soon after the lectures, but the remaining seven
disappeared without leaving a trace.) These latter activities,
and no doubt the production of the lectures as well, had been
facilitated by the slackening in Freud’s clinical work imposed
by war conditions. A watershed had apparently been reached
and the time seemed to have come for a halt. But in fact fresh
creative ideas were in preparation which were to see the light
in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g), Group Psychology (1921c)
and The Ego and the Id (1923Z>). Indeed, the line must not be
drawn too sharply. Already, for instance, hints may be detected
of the notion of the ‘compulsion to repeat’ (p. 274), and the
beginnings of the analysis of the ego are quite apparent (pp. 422
and 428), while the difficulties over the multiple senses of the
term ‘unconscious’ (see p. 227n. 1) are paving the way towards
the new structural account of the mind.
In his preface to these lectures Freud speaks a little depreciatively of the lack of novelty in their contents. But no one,
however well-read in psycho-analytic literature, need feel afraid
of being bored by them or could fail to find plenty in them that
is not to be found elsewhere. The discussions on anxiety (Lec­
ture XXV) and on primal phantasies (Lecture XXIV), which
Freud himself singles out in his preface as fresh material, are
not the only ones he might have mentioned. The review of
symbolism in Lecture X is probably his most complete. No­
where does he give such a clear summary of the formation of
dreams as in the last pages of Lecture XIV. There are no more
understanding commentaries on the perversions than those in
Lectures XX and XXI. Finally, there is no rival to the analy­
sis of the process of psycho-analytic therapy given in the last
lecture of all. And even where the subjects would seem to be

8

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

well-worn, such as the mechanism of parapraxes and of dreams,
they are approached from unexpected directions and throw
fresh illumination on what might have seemed depressingly
familiar ground. The Introductory Lectures have thoroughly
deserved their popularity.1
1 From their very nature these lectures touch upon a large variety
of subjects, into some of which Freud (as he himself remarks in the last
paragraph of the final lecture) has been unable to enter very deeply.
Many readers, and especially students who find in this work their first
approach to psycho-analysis, are likely to come upon some point about
which they would wish to learn more. An attempt has accordingly been
made in the footnotes of this edition to give particularly generous
references to others of Freud’s writings in which the topic in the text
is dealt with at greater length.

PREFACEi
[1917]
What I am here offering the public as an ‘Introduction to
Psycho-Analysis’2 is not designed to compete in any way with
such general accounts of this field of knowledge as are already
in existence, e.g. those of Hitschmann (1913), Pfister (1913),
Kaplan (1914), Regis and Hesnard (1914) and Meijer (1915).
This volume is a faithful reproduction of the lectures which I
delivered [at the University] during the two Winter Terms
1915/16 and 1916/17 before an audience of doctors and laymen
of both sexes.
Any peculiarities of this book which may strike its readers
are accounted for by the conditions in which it originated. It
was not possible in my presentation to preserve the unruffled
calm of a scientific treatise. On the contrary, the lecturer had
to make it his business to prevent his audience’s attention from
lapsing during a session lasting for almost two hours. The
necessities of the moment often made it impossible to avoid
repetitions in treating some particular subject—it might emerge
once, for instance, in connection with dream-interpretation and
then again later on in connection with the problems of the
neuroses. As a result, too, of the way in which the material was
arranged, some important topics (the unconscious, for instance)
could not be exhaustively treated at a single point, but had
to be taken up repeatedly and then dropped again until a
fresh opportunity arose for adding some further information
about it.
Those who are familiar with psycho-analytic literature will
find little in this ‘Introduction’ that could not have been known
to them already from other much more detailed publications.
Nevertheless, the need for rounding-off and summarizing the
subject-matter has compelled the author at certain points (the
1 [This Preface was omitted from the 1922 English translation and its
re-issues.]
1 [A literal translation of the German title of the book would be
‘Lectures to Serve as an Introduction to Psycho-Analysis’.]
9

10

PREFACE

aetiology of anxiety and hysterical phantasies) to bring forward
material that he has hitherto held back.
Freud
Vienna, Spring 1917

PREFACE TO THE
HEBREW TRANSLATION1
[1930]
These lectures were delivered in 1916 and 1917; they gave a
fairly accurate account of the position of the young science at
that period and they contained more than their title indicated.
They provided not only an introduction to psycho-analysis but
covered the greater part of its subject-matter. This is naturally
no longer true. Advances have in the meantime taken place in
its theory and important additions have been made to it, such
as the division of the personality into an ego, a super-ego and
an id, a radical alteration in the theory of the instincts, and
discoveries concerning the origin of conscience and the sense of
guilt. These lectures have thus become to a large extent incom­
plete; it is in fact only now that they have become truly
‘introductory’. But in another sense, even to-day they have not
been superseded or become obsolete. What they contain is still
believed and taught, apart from a few modifications, in psycho­
analytic training schools.
Readers of Hebrew and especially young people eager for
knowledge are presented in this volume with psycho-analysis
clothed in the ancient language which has been awakened to a
new life by the will of the Jewish people. The author can well
picture the problem which this has set its translator. Nor need
he suppress his doubt whether Moses and the Prophets would
have found these Hebrew lectures intelligible. But he begs
their descendants (among whom he himself is numbered), for
whom this book is designed, not to react too quickly to their
first impulses of criticism and dislike by rejecting it. Psycho­
analysis brings forward so much that is new, and among it so
much that contradicts traditional opinions and wounds deeplyrooted feelings, that it is bound at first to provoke denial. A
1 [This preface was first published in German in G.S., 12 (1934),
383-4, and reprinted in G.W'., 16 (1950), 274-5. It is here translated
into English for the first time by James Strachey. The Hebrew trans­
lation was published by the Verlag Stybel in Jerusalem in 1930.]
s.f.

xv—b

11

12

PREFACE

reader who suspends his judgement and allows psycho-analysis
as a whole to make its impression on him will perhaps become
open to a conviction that even this undesired novelty is worth
knowing and is indispensable for anyone who wishes to under­
stand the mind and human life.

Vienna, December 1930

PART I

PARAPRAXES

(1916 [1915])

LECTURE I

INTRODUCTION
Ladies and Gentlemen,—I cannot tell how much knowledge
about psycho-analysis each one of you has already acquired
from what you have read or from hearsay. But the wording of
my prospectus—‘Elementary Introduction to Psycho-Analysis’
—obliges me to treat you as though you knew nothing and
stood in need of some preliminary information.
I can, however, assume this much—that you know that
psycho-analysis is a procedure for the medical treatment of
neurotic patients. And here I can at once give you an instance
of how in this field a number of things take place in a different
way—often, indeed, in an opposite way—from what they do
elsewhere in medical practice. When elsewhere we introduce a
patient to a medical technique which is new to him, we usually
minimize its inconveniences and give him confident assurances
of the success of the treatment. I think we are justified in this,
since by doing so we are increasing the probability of success.
But when we take a neurotic patient into psycho-analytic treat­
ment, we act differently. We point out the difficulties of the
method to him, its long duration, the efforts and sacrifices it
calls for; and as regards its success, we tell him we cannot
promise it with certainty, that it depends on his own conduct,
his understanding, his adaptability and his perseverance. We
have good reasons, of course, for such apparently wrong­
headed behaviour, as you will perhaps come to appreciate
later on.
Do not be annoyed, then, if I begin by treating you in the
same way as these neurotic patients. I seriously advise you not
to join my audience a second time. To support this advice, I
will explain to you how incomplete any instruction in psycho­
analysis must necessarily be and what difficulties stand in the
way of your forming a judgement of your own upon it. I will '
show you how the whole trend of your previous education and
all your habits of thought are inevitably bound to make you
into opponents of psycho-analysis, and how much you would
15

16

INTRODUCTION

have to overcome in yourselves in order to get the better of this
instinctive opposition. I cannot, of course, foretell how much
understanding of psycho-analysis you will obtain from the
information I give you, but I can promise you this: that by
listening to it you will not have learnt how to set about a
psycho-analytic investigation or how to carry a treatment
through. If, however, there should actually turn out to be one
of you who did not feel satisfied by a fleeting acquaintance with
psycho-analysis but was inclined to enter into a permanent re­
lationship to it, I should not merely dissuade him from doing so
but actively warn him against it. As things stand at present, such
a choice of profession would ruin any chance he might have of
success at a University, and, if he started in life as a practising
physician, he would find himself in a society which did not
understand his efforts, which regarded him with distrust and
hostility, and unleashed upon him all the evil spirits lurking
within it. And the phenomena accompanying the war that is
now raging in Europe will perhaps give you some notion of
what legions of these evil spirits there may be.
Nevertheless, there are quite a number of people for whom,
in spite of these inconveniences, something that promises to
bring them a fresh piece of knowledge still has its attraction. If
a few of you should be of this sort and in spite of my warnings
appear here again for my next lecture, you will be welcome.
All of you, however, have a right to learn the nature of the
difficulties of psycho-analysis to which I have alluded.

I will begin with those connected with instruction, with
training in psycho-analysis. In medical training you are accus­
tomed to see things. You see an anatomical preparation, the
precipitate of a chemical reaction, the shortening of a muscle as
a result of the stimulation of its nerves. Later on, patients are
demonstrated before your senses—the symptoms of their illness,
the products of the pathological process and even in many cases
the agent of the disease in isolation. In the surgical departments
you are witnesses of the active measures taken to bring help to
patients, and you may yourselves attempt to put them into
effect. Even in psychiatry the demonstration of patients with
their altered facial expressions, their mode of speech and their
behaviour, affords you plenty of observations which leave a

I. INTRODUCTION

17

deep impression on you. Thus a medical teacher plays in the
main the part of a leader and interpreter who accompanies you
through a museum, while you gain a direct contact with the
objects exhibited and feel yourselves convinced of the existence
of the new facts through your own perception.
In psycho-analysis, alas, everything is different. Nothing
takes place in a psycho-analytic treatment but an interchange
of words between the patient and the analyst. The patient talks,
tells of his past experiences and present impressions, complains,
confesses to his wishes and his emotional impulses. The doctor
listens, tries to direct the patient’s processes of thought, exhorts,
forces his attention in certain directions, gives him explanations
and observes the reactions of understanding or rejection which
he in this way provokes in him. The uninstructed relatives of
our patients, who are only impressed by visible and tangible
things—preferably by actions of the sort that are to be wit­
nessed at the cinema—never fail to express their doubts whether
‘anything can be done about the illness by mere talking’. That,
of course, is both a short-sighted and an inconsistent line of
thought. These are the same people who are so certain that
patients are ‘simply imagining’ their symptoms. Words were
originally magic and to this day words have retained much of
their ancient magical power. By words one person can make
another blissfully happy or drive him to despair, by words the
teacher conveys his knowledge to his pupils, by words the orator
carries his audience with him and determines their judgements
and decisions. Words provoke affects and are in general the
means of mutual influence among men. Thus we shall not de­
preciate the use of words in psychotherapy and we shall be
pleased if we can listen to the words that pass between the
analyst and his patient.1
But we cannot do that either. The talk of which psycho­
analytic treatment consists brooks no listener; it cannot be
demonstrated. A neurasthenic or hysterical patient can of
course, like any other, be introduced to students in a psychiatric
lecture. He will give an account of his complaints and symp­
toms, but of nothing else. The information required by analysis
will be given by him only on condition of his having a special
1 [Gf. a parallel passage near the beginning of The Question of Lay
Analysis (1926e), Standard Ed., 20, 187-8.]

18

INTRODUCTION

emotional attachment to the doctor; he would become silent as
soon as he observed a single witness to whom he felt indifferent.
For this information concerns what is most intimate in his
mental life, everything that, as a socially independent person,
he must conceal from other people, and, beyond that, every­
thing that, as a homogeneous personality, he will not admit to
himself.
Thus you cannot be present as an audience at a psycho­
analytic treatment. You can only be told about it; and, in the
strictest sense of the word, it is only by hearsay that you will get
to know psycho-analysis. As a result of receiving your instruc­
tion at second hand, as it were, you find yourselves under quite
unusual conditions for forming a judgement. Thatwill obviously
depend for the most part on how much credence you can give
to your informant.
Let us assume for a moment that you were attending a lecture
not on psychiatry but on history, and that the lecturer was tell­
ing you of the life and military deeds of Alexander the Great.
What grounds would you have for believing in the truth of what
he reported? At a first glance the position would seem to be
even more unfavourable than in the case of psycho-analysis, for
the Professor of History no more took part in Alexander’s cam­
paigns than you did. The psycho-analyst does at least report
things in which he himself played a part. But in due course we
come to the things that confirm what the historian has told you.
He could refer you to the reports given by ancient writers, who
were either themselves contemporary with the events under
question or, at any rate, were comparatively close to them—he
could refer you, that is to say, to the works of Diodorus,
Plutarch, Arrian, and so on. He could put reproductions before
you of coins and statues of the king which have survived and
he could hand round to you a photograph of the Pompeian
mosaic of the battle of Issus. Strictly speaking, however, all these
documents only prove that earlier generations already believed
in Alexander’s existence and in the reality of his deeds, and
your criticism might start afresh at that point. You would then
discover that not all that has been reported about Alexander
deserves credence or can be confirmed in its details; but never­
theless I cannot think that you would leave the lecture-room
in doubts of the reality of Alexander the Great. Your decision

I. INTRODUCTION

19

would be determined essentially by two considerations: first,
that the lecturer had no conceivable motive for assuring you of
the reality of something he himself did not think real, and
secondly, that all the available history books describe the events
in approximately similar terms. If you went on to examine the
older sources, you would take the same factors into account—
the possible motives of the informants and the conformity of the
witnesses to one another. The outcome of your examination
would undoubtedly be reassuring in the case of Alexander, but
would probably be different where figures such as Moses or
Nimrod were concerned. Later opportunities will bring to light
clearly enough what doubts you may feel about the credibility
of your psycho-analytic informant.
But you will have a right to ask another question. If there is
no objective verification of psycho-analysis, and no possibility
of demonstrating it, how can one learn psycho-analysis at all,
and convince oneself of the truth of its assertions? It is true that
psycho-analysis cannot easily be learnt and there are not many
people who have learnt it properly. But of course there is a prac­
ticable method none the less. One learns psycho-analysis on
oneself, by studying one’s own personality. This is not quite the
same thing as what is called self-observation, but it can, if
necessary, be subsumed under it. There are a whole number of
very common and generally familiar mental phenomena which,
after a little instruction in technique, can be made the subject
of analysis upon oneself. In that way one acquires the desired
sense of conviction of the reality of the processes described by
analysis and of the correctness of its views. Nevertheless, there
are definite limits to progress by this method. One advances
much further if one is analysed oneself by a practised analyst
and experiences the effects of analysis on one’s own self, making
use of the opportunity of picking up the subtler technique of the
process from one’s analyst. This excellent method is, of course,
applicable only to a single person and never to a whole lecture­
room of students together.

Psycho-analysis is not to be blamed for a second difficulty in
your relation to it; I must make you yourselves responsible for
it, Ladies and Gentlemen, at least in so far as you have been
students of medicine. Your earlier education has given a

20

INTRODUCTION

particular direction to your thinking, which leads far away from
psycho-analysis. You have been trained to find an anatomical
basis for the functions of the organism and their disorders, to
explain them chemically and physically and to view them bio­
logically. But no portion of your interest has been directed to
psychical life, in which, after all, the achievement of this marvel­
lously complex organism reaches its peak. For that reason
psychological modes of thought have remained foreign to you.
You have grown accustomed to regarding them with suspicion,
to denying them the attribute of being scientific, and to handing
them over to laymen, poets, natural philosophers1 and mystics.
This limitation is without doubt detrimental to your medical
activity, since, as is the rule in all human relationships, your
patients will begin by presenting you with their mental facade,
and I fear that you will be obliged as a punishment to leave a
part of the therapeutic influence you1
2 are seeking to the lay
practitioners, nature curers and mystics whom you so much
despise.
I am not unaware of the excuse that we have to accept for
this defect in your education. No philosophical auxiliary science
exists which could be made of service for your medical purposes.
Neither speculative philosophy, nor descriptive psychology, nor
what is called experimental psychology (which is closely allied
to the physiology of the sense-organs), as they are taught in the
Universities, are in a position to tell you anything serviceable of
the relation between body and mind or to provide you with
the key to an understanding of possible disturbances of the
mental functions. It is true that psychiatry, as a part of medi­
cine, sets about describing the mental disorders it observes and
collecting them into clinical entities; but at favourable moments
the psychiatrists themselves have doubts of whether their purely
descriptive hypotheses deserve the name of a science. Nothing
is known of the origin, the mechanism or the mutual relations
of the symptoms of which these clinical entities are composed;
there are either no observable changes in the anatomical organ
1 [In the sense of followers of Schelling’s pantheistic ‘philosophy of
nature’, which prevailed in Germany during the earlier part of the
nineteenth century.]
2 [‘iSie (you)’ in the earlier German editions; ‘sie (they)’ in G.S. and

G.W.]

I. INTRODUCTION

21

of the mind to correspond to them, or changes which throw no
light upon them. These mental disorders are only accessible to
therapeutic influence when they can be recognized as sub­
sidiary effects of what is otherwise an organic illness.
This is the gap which psycho-analysis seeks to fill. It tries to
give psychiatry its missing psychological foundation. It hopes to
discover the common ground on the basis of which the con­
vergence of physical and mental disorder will become intelli­
gible. With this aim in view, psycho-analysis must keep itself
free from any hypothesis that is alien to it, whether of an
anatomical, chemical or physiological kind, and must operate
entirely with purely psychological auxiliary ideas; and for
that very reason, I fear, it will seem strange to you to begin
with.
I shall not hold you, your education or your attitude of mind
responsible for the next difficulty. Two of the hypotheses of
psycho-analysis are an insult to the entire world and have
earned its dislike. One of them offends against an intellectual
prejudice, the other against an aesthetic and moral one. We
must not be too contemptuous of these prejudices; they are
powerful things, precipitates of human developments that were
useful and indeed essential. They are kept in existence by
emotional forces and the struggle against them is hard.
The first of these unpopular assertions made by psycho­
analysis declares that mental processes are in themselves un­
conscious and that of all mental life it is only certain individual
acts and portions that are conscious.1 You know that on the
contrary we are in the habit of identifying what is psychical
with what is conscious. We look upon consciousness as nothing
more nor less than the defining characteristic of the psychical, and
psychology as the study of the contents of consciousness. Indeed
it seems to us so much a matter of course to equate them in this
way that any contradiction of the idea strikes us as obvious non1 \?Unbewussi‘ and ‘bewuss’. It should be realized from the first that
in German these words have a passive grammatical form and, generally
speaking, a passive sense. In English ‘conscious’ and ‘unconscious’ may
be used passively but as often as not are used actively. ‘I am conscious
of a pain in my toe’ or ‘he was unconscious of his hatred’. The German
usage would rather speak of the pain as conscious and the hatred uncon­
scious, and this is the usage adopted regularly by Freud.]

22

INTRODUCTION

sense. Yet psycho-analysis cannot avoid raising this contradic­
tion; it cannot accept the identity of the conscious and the
mental.1 It defines what is mental as processes such as feeling,
thinking and willing, and it is obliged to maintain that there is
unconscious thinking and unapprehended willing. In saying
this it has from the start frivolously forfeited the sympathy of
every friend of sober scientific thought, and laid itself open to
the suspicion of being a fantastic esoteric doctrine eager to
make mysteries and fish in troubled waters. But you, Ladies and
Gentlemen, naturally cannot understand as yet what right I
have to describe as a prejudice a statement of so abstract a
nature as ‘what is mental is conscious’. Nor can you guess what
development can have led to a denial of the unconscious—
should such a thing exist—and what advantage there may have
been in that denial. The question whether we are to make the
psychical coincide with the conscious or make it extend further
sounds like an empty dispute about words; yet I can assure you
that the hypothesis of there being unconscious mental processes
paves the way to a decisive new orientation in the world and in
science.
You cannot have any notion, either, of what an intimate
connection there is between this first piece of audacity on the
part of psycho-analysis and the second one, which I must now
tell you of. This second thesis, which psycho-analysis puts for­
ward as one of its findings, is an assertion that instinctual im­
pulses which can only be described as sexual, both in the
narrower and wider sense of the word, play an extremely large
and never hitherto appreciated part in the causation of nervous
and mental diseases. It asserts further that these same sexual
impulses also make contributions that must not be under­
estimated to the highest cultural, artistic and social creations
of the human spirit.2
In my experience antipathy to this outcome of psycho­
analytic research is the most important source of resistance
which it has met with. Would you like to hear how we explain
that fact? We believe that civilization has been created under
the pressure of the exigencies of life at the cost of satisfaction of
1 [The first section of Freud’s paper on ‘The Unconscious’ (1915e),

Standard Ed., 14, 166 ff., discusses this question at great length.]
* [The sexual instincts form the topic of Lecture XX.]

I. INTRODUCTION

23

the instincts; and we believe that civilization is to a large extent
being constantly created anew, since each individual who makes
a fresh entry into human society repeats this sacrifice of in­
stinctual satisfaction for the benefit of the whole community.
Among the instinctual forces which are put to this use the
sexual impulses play an important part; in this process they are
sublimated—that is to say, they are diverted from their sexual
aims and directed to others that are socially higher and no
longer sexual. But this arrangement is unstable; the sexual in­
stincts are imperfectly tamed, and, in the case of every in­
dividual who is supposed to join in the work of civilization,
there is a risk that his sexual instincts may refuse to be put to
that use. Society believes that no greater threat to its civiliza­
tion could arise than if the sexual instincts were to be liberated
and returned to their original aims.1 For this reason society does
not wish to be reminded of this precarious portion of its founda­
tions. It has no interest in the recognition of the strength of the
sexual instincts or in the demonstration of the importance of
sexual life to the individual. On the contrary, with an educa­
tional aim in view, it has set about diverting attention from that
whole field of ideas. That is why it will not tolerate this out­
come of psycho-analytic research and far prefers to stamp it as
something aesthetically repulsive and morally reprehensible, or
as something dangerous. But objections of this sort are ineffec­
tive against what claims to be an objective outcome of a piece
of scientific work; if the contradiction is to come into the open
it must be restated in intellectual terms. Now it is inherent in
human nature to have an inclination to consider a thing untrue
if one does not like it, and after that it is easy to find arguments
against it. Thus society makes what is disagreeable into what is
untrue. It disputes the truths of psycho-analysis with logical
and factual arguments; but these arise from emotional sources
and it maintains these objections as prejudices, against every
attempt to counter them.
We, however, Ladies and Gentlemen, can claim that in
asserting this controversial thesis we have had no tendentious
aim in view. We have merely wished to give expression to a
1 [The antagonism between civilization and the instinctual forces
received its fullest treatment by Freud in Civilization and its Discontents
(1930a).]

24

INTRODUCTION

matter of fact which we believe we have established by our
painstaking labours. We claim, too, the right to reject without
qualification any interference by practical considerations in
scientific work, even before we have enquired whether the fear
which seeks to impose these considerations on us is justified
or not.

Such, then, are a few of the difficulties that stand in the way
of your interest in psycho-analysis. They are perhaps more than
enough for a start. But if you are able to overcome the impres­
sion they make on you, we will proceed.

LECTURE II

PARAPRAXES
Ladies and Gentlemen,—We will not start with postulates but
with an investigation. Let us choose as its subject certain
phenomena which are very common and very familiar but
which have been very little examined, and which, since they
can be observed in any healthy person, have nothing to do with
illnesses. They are what are known as ‘parapraxes’,1 to which
everyone is liable. It may happen, for instance, that a person
who intends to say something may use another word instead (a
slip of the tongue [Versprecheri\), or he may do the same thing
in writing, and may or may not notice what he has done. Or a
person may read something, whether in print or manuscript,
different from what is actually before his eyes (a misreading
[Verlesen]'), or he may hear wrongly something that has been
said to him (a mishearing [Verhoren])—on the assumption, of
course, that there is no organic disturbance of his powers of
hearing. Another group of these phenomena has as its basis for­
getting [Vergessen]—not, however, a permanent forgetting but
only a temporary one. Thus a person may be unable to get hold
of a name which he nevertheless knows and which he recognizes
at once, or he may forget to carry out an intention, though he
remembers it later and has thus only forgotten it at that par­
ticular moment. In a third group the temporary character is
absent—for instance in the case of mislaying [Verlegen], when a
person has put something somewhere and cannot find it again

1 [‘Fehlleistungeri1, literally ‘faulty acts’ or ‘faulty functions’. The
general concept did not exist before Freud, and an English term was
invented for its translation. The whole of The Psychopathology of Everyday
Life (19016) is devoted to a discussion of them. Freud often used them in
his didactic writings (as he does here) as the most suitable material for
an introduction to his theories. They were, indeed, among the earliest
subjects of his own psychological investigations. Some account of the
history of his interest in them will be found in the Editor’s Introduction
to the sixth volume of the Standard Edition. Since there will be a large
number of references to that work in the present lectures, the abbrevia­
tion ‘P.E.L.’ will be used here in order to economize space. ,The page
references in all such cases will be to Standard Ed., 6.]
25

26

PARAPRAXES

or in the precisely analogous case of losing [Verliereri]. Here we
have a forgetting which we treat differently from other kinds of
forgetting, one at which we are surprised or annoyed instead of
finding it understandable. In addition to all this there are par­
ticular sorts of errors [Irrtiimer], in which the temporary char­
acter is present once more; for in their instance we believe for a
time that something is the case which both before and after­
wards we know is not so. And there are a number of other
similar phenomena known by various names.
All these are occurrences whose internal affinity with one
another is expressed in the fact that [in German] they begin
with the syllable ‘ver’.1 They are almost all of an unimportant
kind, most of them are very transitory, and they are without
much significance in human life. Only rarely does one of them,
such as losing an object, attain some degree of practical im­
portance. For that reason, too, they attract little attention, give
rise to no more than feeble emotions, and so on.

It is to these phenomena, then, that I now propose to draw
your attention. But you will protest with some annoyance:
‘There are so many vast problems in the wide2 universe, as well
as within the narrower confines of our minds, so many marvels
in the field of mental disorders, which require and deserve to
have light thrown upon them, that it does really seem gratuitous
to waste labour and interest on such trivialities. If you could
make us understand why a person with sound eyes and ears can
see and hear in broad daylight things that are not there, why
another person suddenly thinks he is being persecuted by the
people of whom he has hitherto been most fond, or puts forward
the cleverest arguments in support of delusional beliefs which
any child could see were nonsensical, then we should have some
opinion of psycho-analysis. But if it can do no more than ask us
to consider why a speaker at a banquet uses one word instead
of another or why a housewife has mislaid her keys, and similar
futilities, then we shall know how to put our time and interest
to better uses.’
I should reply: Patience, Ladies and Gentlemen! I think your
criticism has gone astray. It is true that psycho-analysis cannot
1 [The English syllable ‘mis’ has a similar sense.]
2 [In the editions from 1922 onwards this word is omitted.]

II. PARAPRAXES (1)

27

boast that it has never concerned itself with trivialities. On the
contrary, the material for its observations is usually provided
by the inconsiderable events which have been put aside by the
other sciences as being too unimportant—the dregs, one might
say, of the world of phenomena. But are you not making a con­
fusion in your criticism between the vastness of the problems
and the conspicuousness of what points to them? Are there not
very important things which can only reveal themselves, under
certain conditions and at certain times, by quite feeble indica­
tions? I should find no difficulty in giving you several examples
of such situations. If you are a young man, for instance, will it
not be from small pointers that you will conclude that you have
won a girl’s favour? Would you wait for an express declaration
of love or a passionate embrace? Or would not a glance,
scarcely noticed by other people, be enough? a slight move­
ment, the lengthening by a second of the pressure of a hand?
And if you were a detective engaged in tracing a murder, would
you expect to find that the murderer had left his photograph
behind at the place of the crime, with his address attached? or
would you not necessarily have to be satisfied with compara­
tively slight and obscure traces of the person you were in search
of? So do not let us under-estimate small indications; by their
help we may succeed in getting on the track of something bigger.
Furthermore, I think like you that the great problems of the
universe and of science have the first claim on our interest. But
it is as a rule of very little use to form an express intention of
devoting oneself to research into this or that great problem. One
is then often at a loss to know the first step to take. It is more
promising in scientific work to attack whatever is immediately
before one and offers an opportunity for research. If one does so
really thoroughly and without prejudice or preconception, and
if one has luck, then, since everything is related to everything,
including small things to great, one may gain access even from
such unpretentious work to a study of the great problems. That
is what I should say in order to retain your interest, when we
deal with such apparent trivialities as the parapraxes of healthy
people.
Let us now call in someone who knows nothing of psycho­
analysis, and ask him how he explains such occurrences. His
s.f. xv—c

28

PARAPRAXES

first reply will certainly be: ‘Oh! that’s not worth explaining:
they’re just small chance events.’ What does the fellow mean by
this? Is he maintaining that there are occurrences, however
small, which drop out of the universal concatenation of events
—occurrences which might just as well not happen as happen?
If anyone makes a breach of this kind in the determinism of
natural events at a single point, it means that he has thrown
overboard the whole Weltanschauung of science. Even the Weltan­
schauung of religion, we may remind him, behaves much more
consistently, since it gives an explicit assurance that no sparrow
falls from the roof without God’s special will. I think our friend
will hesitate to draw the logical conclusion from his first reply;
he will change his mind and say that after all when he comes to
study these things he can find explanations of them. What is in
question are small failures of functioning, imperfections in
mental activity, whose determinants can be assigned. A man
who can usually speak correctly may make a slip of the tongue
(1) if he is slightly indisposed and tired, (2) if he is excited and
(3) if he is too much occupied with other things. It is easy to
confirm these statements. Slips of the tongue do really occur
with particular frequency when one is tired, has a headache or
is threatened with migraine. In the same circumstances proper
names are easily forgotten. Some people are accustomed to
recognize the approach of an attack of migraine when proper
names escape them in this way.1 When we are excited, too, we
often make mistakes over words—and over things as well, and
a ‘bungled action’ follows. Intentions are forgotten and a quan­
tity of other undesigned actions become noticeable if we are
absent-minded—that is, properly speaking, if we are concen­
trated on something else. A familiar example of this absent­
mindedness is the Professor in Fliegende Blatter2 who leaves his
umbrella behind and takes the wrong hat because he is thinking
about the problems he is going to deal with in his next book.
All of us can recall from our own experience instances of how
we can forget intentions we have formed and promises we have
made because in the meantime we have had some absorbing
experience.
This sounds quite reasonable and seems safe from contradic1 [This was a personal experience of Freud’s, P.E.L., 21.]
* [The comic weekly.]

II. PARAPRAXES (1)

29

tion, though it may not be very interesting, perhaps, and not
what we expected. Let us look at these explanations of para­
praxes more closely. The alleged preconditions for the occur­
rence of these phenomena are not all of the same kind. Being ill
and disturbances of the circulation provide a physiological
reason for the impairment of normal functioning; excitement,
fatigue and distraction are factors of another sort, which might
be described as psycho-physiological. These last admit of easy
translation into theory. Both fatigue and distraction, and per­
haps also general excitement, bring about a division of atten­
tion which may result in insufficient attention being directed to
the function in question. If so, the function can be disturbed
with especial ease, or carried out inaccurately. Slight illness or
changes in the blood-supply to the central nervous organ can
have the same effect, by influencing the determining factor, the
division of attention, in a similar manner. In all these cases,
therefore, it would be a question of the effects of a disturbance
of attention, whether from organic or psychical causes.
This does not appear to promise much for our psycho­
analytic interest. We might feel tempted to drop the subject.
If, however, we examine the observations more closely, what we
find does not tally entirely with this attention theory of para­
praxes, or at least does not follow from it naturally. We dis­
cover that parapraxes of this kind and forgetting of this kind
occur in people who are not fatigued or absent-minded or ex­
cited, but who are in all respects in their normal state—unless
we choose to ascribe ex postfacto to the people concerned, purely
on account of their parapraxis, an excitement which, however,
they themselves do not admit to. Nor can it be simply the case
that a function is ensured by an increase in the attention
directed upon it and endangered if that attention is reduced.
There are a large number of procedures that one carries out
purely automatically, with very little attention, but neverthe­
less performs with complete security. A walker, who scarcely
knows where he is going, keeps to the right path for all that,
and stops at his destination without having gone astray \yergangeri]. Or at all events this is so as a rule. An expert pianist
strikes the right keys without thinking. He may, of course, make
an occasional mistake; but if automatic playing increased the
danger of bungling, that danger would be at its greatest for a

30

PARAPRAXES

virtuoso, whose playing, as a result of prolonged practice, has
become entirely automatic. We know, on the contrary, that
many procedures are carried out with quite particular cer­
tainty if they are not the object of a specially high degree of
attention,1 and that the mishap of a parapraxis is liable to
occur precisely if special importance is attached to correct func­
tioning and there has therefore certainly been no distraction of
the necessary attention. It could be argued that this is the result
of ‘excitement’, but it is difficult to see why the excitement
should not on the contrary increase the attention directed to
what is so earnestly intended. If by a slip of the tongue someone
says the opposite of what he intends in an important speech or
oral communication, it can scarcely be explained by the
psycho-physiological or attention theory.
There are, moreover, a number of small subsidiary pheno­
mena in the case of parapraxes, which we do not understand
and on which the explanations so far given shed no light. For
instance, if we have temporarily forgotten a name, we are
annoyed about it, do all we can to remember it and cannot
leave the business alone. Why in such cases do we so extremely
seldom succeed in directing our attention, as we are after all
anxious to do, to the word which (as we say) is ‘on the tip of our
tongue’ and which we recognize at once when we are told it?
Or again: there are cases in which the parapraxes multiply,
form chains, and replace one another. On a first occasion one
has missed an appointment. On the next occasion, when one
has firmly decided not to forget this time, it turns out that one
has made a note of the wrong hour. Or one tries to arrive at a
forgotten word by roundabout ways and thereupon a second
name escapes one which might have helped one to find the first.
If one searches for this second name, a third disappears, and so
on. As is well known, the same thing can happen with mis­
prints, which are to be regarded as the parapraxes of the com­
positor. An obstinate misprint of this kind, so it is said, once
slipped into a social-democrat newspaper. Its report of some
ceremonial included the words: ‘Among those present was to be
noticed His Highness the Kornprinz’ Next day an attempt was
1 [Freud has often suggested elsewhere that functions may be per­
formed more accurately in the absence of conscious attention. See
P.E.L., 132.]

II. PARAPRAXES (1)

31

made at a correction. The paper apologized and said: ‘We
should of course have said “the Knorprinz”.’ 1 People speak in
such cases of a ‘demon of misprints’ or a ‘type-setting fiend’—•
terms which at least go beyond any psycho-physiological theory
of misprints.2
Perhaps you are familiar, too, with the fact that it is possible
to provoke slips of the tongue, to produce them, as it were, by
suggestion. An anecdote illustrates this. A stage neophyte had
been cast for the important part in [Schiller’s] Die Jungfrau von
Orleans of the messenger who announces to the King that ‘der
Connetable schickt sein Schwert zurtick [the Constable sends
back his sword]’. A leading actor amused himself during the
rehearsal by repeatedly inducing the nervous young man to say,
instead of the words of the text: ‘der Komfortabel schickt sein
Pferd zurtick [the cab-driver sends back his horse].’ 8 He
achieved his aim: the wretched beginner actually made his debut
at the performance with the corrupt version, in spite of having
been warned against it, or perhaps because he had been warned.

No light is thrown on these small features of parapraxes by
the theory of withdrawal of attention. The theory need not on
that account be wrong, however; it may merely lack something,
some addition, before it is entirely satisfying. But some of the
parapraxes, too, can themselves be looked at from another
point of view.
Let us take slips of the tongue as the most suitable sort of para­
praxis for our purpose—though we might equally well have
chosen slips of the pen or misreading.4 We must bear in mind
1 [What was intended was the ‘Kronprinz (Crown Prince)’. ‘Korn’
means ‘com’ and ‘Knorr’ ‘protuberance’.]
2 [Cf. P.E.L., 130-1.]
8 [There seems to be some confusion here. Actually (in Act I,
Scene 2 of the play) it is the King himself who announces the Constable’s
defection.]
4 [It is most unfortunate from the point of view of the translator that
Freud chose slips of the tongue as his most frequent examples of para­
praxes in all three of these lectures, since they are from their very nature
peculiarly resistant to translation. We have, however, followed our in­
variable practice in the Standard Edition and kept Freud’s instances, with
footnote and square bracket explanations, rather than replace them by
extraneous English ones. Plenty of the latter will be found elsewhere,
especially in papers by A. A. Brill (1912) and Ernest Jones (1911).]

32

PARAPRAXES

that so far we have only asked when—under what conditions—
people make slips of the tongue, and it is only to that question
that we have had an answer. But we might direct our interest
elsewhere and enquire why it is that the slip occurred in this
particular way and no other; and we might take into account
what it is that emerges in the slip itself. You will observe that, so
long as this question is unanswered and no light thrown on the
product of the slip, the phenomenon remains a chance event
from the psychological point of view, even though it may have
been given a physiological explanation. If I make a slip of the
tongue, I might obviously do so in an infinite number of ways,
the right word might be replaced by any of a thousand others,
it might be distorted in countless different directions. Is there
something, then, that compels me in the particular case to make
the slip in one special way, or does it remain a matter of chance,
of arbitrary choice, and is the question perhaps one to which no
sensible answer at all can be given?
Two writers, Meringer and Mayer (a philologist and a
psychiatrist), in fact made an attempt in 1895 to attack the
problem of parapraxes from this angle. They collected examples
and began by treating them in a purely descriptive way. This,
of course, provides no explanation as yet, though it might pave
the way to one. They distinguish the various kinds of distortions
imposed by the slip on the intended speech as ‘transpositions’,
‘pre-sonances [anticipations]’, ‘post-sonances [perseverations]’,
‘fusions (contaminations)’ and ‘replacements (substitutions)’. I
will give you some examples of these main groups proposed by
the authors. An instance of transposition would be to say ‘the
Milo of Venus’ instead of‘the Venus of Milo’ (a transposition of
the order of the words); an instance of a pre-sonance [anticipa­
tion] would be: ‘es war mir auf der Schwest. . . auf der Brust so
schwer’;1 and a post-sonance [perseveration] would be exem­
plified by the well-known toast that went wrong: ‘Ich fordere
Sie auf, auf das Wohl unseres Chefs aw/zustossen’ [instead of
awzustossen].1
2 These three forms of slip of the tongue are not
1 [The phrase intended was : ‘it lay on my breast so heavily.’ The
meaningless ‘Schwest’ was a distortion of ‘Brust (breast)’ owing to an
anticipation of the ‘schw’ of ‘schwer (heavily)’. This and the preceding
example are also in P.E.L., 53-4.]
2 [‘I call on you to hiccough to' (instead of ‘drink to’) ‘the health of

II. PARAPRAXES (1)

33

exactly common. You will come on much more numerous
examples in which the slip results from contraction or fusion.
Thus, for instance, a gentleman addressed a lady in the street in
the following words: ‘If you will permit me, madam, I should
like to begleit-digen you.’ The composite word,1 in addition to
the ‘begleiten [to accompany]’, evidently has concealed in it
‘beleidigen [to insult]’. (Incidentally, the young man was not
likely to have much success with the lady.) As an example of a
substitution Meringer and Mayer give the case of someone
saying: ‘Ich gebe die Praparate in den Zlnefkasten’ instead of
‘.Sraikasten’.2
The attempted explanation which these authors base on their
collection of instances is quite peculiarly inadequate. They be­
lieve that the sounds and syllables of a word have a particular
‘valency’ and that the innervation of an element of high valency
may have a disturbing influence on one that is less valent. Here
they are clearly basing themselves on the far from common
cases of pre-sonance and post-sonance; these preferences of
some sounds over others (if they in fact exist) can have no bear­
ing at all on other effects of slips of the tongue. After all, the
commonest slips of the tongue are when, instead of saying one
word, we say another very much like it; and this similarity is for
many people a sufficient explanation of such slips. For instance,
a Professor declared in his inaugural lecture: ‘I am not ‘geneigt
[inclined]’ (instead of ‘geeignet [qualified]’) to appreciate the
services of my highly esteemed predecessor.’ Or another Pro­
fessor remarked: Tn the case of the female genitals, in spite of
many Versuchungen [temptations]—I beg your pardon, Versuehe
[experiments]. . . .’ 3
The most usual, and at the same time the most striking kind
of slips of the tongue, however, are those in which one says the
precise opposite of what one intended to say. Here, of course,
we are very remote from relations between sounds and the
effects of similarity; and instead we can appeal to the fact that
our Chief.’ This, too, occurs in P.E.L., 54, where, however, the trans­
lation is slightly different.]
1 [A meaningless one.]
2 [T put the preparation into the letter-box’ instead of ‘incubator’,
literally, ‘hatching-box’. These last two examples occur in P.E.L., 68
and 54.]
8 [P.E.L., 69 and 78-9.]

34

PARAPRAXES

contraries have a strong conceptual kinship with each other and
stand in a particularly close psychological association with each
other.1 There are historical examples of such occurrences. A
President of the Lower House of our Parliament once opened
the sitting with the words: ‘Gentlemen, I take notice that a full
quorum of members is present and herewith declare the sitting
closed.’ 1
2
Any other familiar association can act in the same insidious
fashion as a contrary one, and can emerge in quite unsuit­
able circumstances. Thus, on the occasion of a celebration in
honour of the marriage of a child of Hermann von Helmholtz
to a child of Werner von Siemens, the well-known inventor
and industrialist, it is said that the duty of proposing the
young couple’s health fell to the famous physiologist Du BoisReymond. No doubt he made a brilliant speech, but he ended
with the words: ‘So, long life to the new firm of Siemens and
Halske!’ That was, of course, the name of the old firm. The
juxtaposition of the two names must have been as familiar to a
Berliner as Fortnum and Mason would be to a Londoner.3
We must therefore include among the causes of parapraxes
not only relations between sounds and verbal similarity, but the
influence of word-associations as well. But that is not all. In a
number of cases it seems impossible to explain a slip of the
tongue unless we take into account something that had been
said, or even merely thought, in an earlier sentence. Once
again, then, we have here a case of perseveration, like those
insisted upon by Meringer, but of more distant origin.—I
must confess that I feel on the whole as though after all
this we were further than ever from understanding slips of the
tongue.

Nevertheless I hope I am not mistaken in saying that during
this last enquiry we have all of us formed a fresh impression of
1 [Cf. below, p. 178 ff.]
2 [P.E.L., 59. The example was also used by Freud in one of his very
last writings, the unfinished ‘Some Elementary Lessons in Psycho­
Analysis’ (19405 [1938]).]
8 [In the original: ‘as Riedel and Beutel would be to a Viennese’.
This last was a well-known outfitter’s shop in Vienna. Siemens and
Halske were, of course, the great electrical engineers.]

II. PARAPRAXES (1)

35

these instances of slips bf the tongue, and that it may be worth
while to consider that impression further. We examined the
conditions under which in general slips of the tongue occur, and
afterwards the influences which determine the kind of distortion
which the slip produces. But we have so far paid no attention
whatever to the product of the slip considered by itself, without
reference to its origin. If we decide to do so, we are bound in
the end to find the courage to say that in a few examples what
results from the slip of the tongue has a sense of its own. What
do we mean by ‘has a sense’? That the product of the slip of the
tongue may perhaps itself have a right to be regarded as a com­
pletely valid psychical act, pursuing an aim of its own, as a
statement with a content and significance. So far we have
always spoken of‘parapraxes [faulty acts]’, but it seems now as
though sometimes the faulty act was itself quite a normal act,
which merely took the place of the other act which was the one
expected or intended.
The fact of the parapraxis having a sense of its own seems in
certain cases evident and unmistakable. When the President of
the Lower House with his first words closed the sitting instead of
opening it, we feel inclined, in view of our knowledge of the
circumstances in which the slip of the tongue occurred, to
recognize that the parapraxis had a sense. The President ex­
pected nothing good of the sitting and would have been glad if
he could have brought it to an immediate end. We have no
difficulty in pointing to the sense of this slip of the tongue, or,
in other words, in interpreting it. Or, let us suppose that one
lady says to another in tones of apparent admiration: ‘That
smart new hat—I suppose you aufgepatzt [a non-existent word
instead of aufgeputzt (trimmed)] it yourself?’ Then no amount
of scientific propriety will succeed in preventing our seeing be­
hind this slip of the tongue the words: ‘This hat is a Patzerei
[botched-up affair].’ Or, once more, we are told that a lady
who was well-known for her energy remarked on one occasion:
‘My husband asked his doctor what diet he ought to follow; but
the doctor told him he had no need to diet: he could eat and
drink what I want.’ Here again the slip of the tongue has an
unmistakable other side to it: it was giving expression to a
consistently planned programme.1
1 [These two last examples appear in P.E.L., 87 and 70.]

36

PARAPRAXES

If it turned out, Ladies and Gentlemen, that not only a few
instances of slips of the tongue and of parapraxes in general
have a sense, but a considerable number of them, the sense of
parapraxes, of which we have so far heard nothing, would in­
evitably become their most interesting feature and would push
every other consideration into the background. We should then
be able to leave all physiological or psycho-physiological factors
on one side and devote ourselves to purely psychological in­
vestigations into the sense—that is, the meaning or purpose—of
parapraxes. We shall therefore make it our business to test this
expectation on a considerable number of observations.

But before carrying out this intention I should like to invite
you to follow me along another track. It has repeatedly hap­
pened that a creative writer has made use of a slip of the tongue
or some other parapraxis as an instrument for producing an
imaginative effect. This fact alone must prove to us that he re­
gards the parapraxis—the slip of the tongue, for instance—as
having a sense, since he has produced it deliberately. For what
has happened is not that the author has made an accidental slip
of the pen and has then allowed it to be used by one of his
characters as a slip of the tongue; he intends to bring something
to our notice by means of the slip of the tongue and we can
enquire what that something is—whether perhaps he wants to
suggest that the character in question is absent-minded and
fatigued or is going to have an attack of migraine. If the author
uses the slip as though it had a sense, we have no wish, of
course, to exaggerate the importance of this. After all, a slip
might in fact be without a sense, a chance psychical event, or
it might have a sense in only quite rare cases, but the author
would still retain his right to intellectualize it by famishing it
with a sense so as to employ it for his own purposes. Nor would
it be surprising if we had more to learn about slips of the tongue
from creative writers than from philologists and psychiatrists.
An example of this kind is to be found in [Schiller’s] Wallen­
stein (Piccolomini, Act I, Scene 5). In the preceding scene Max
Piccolomini has ardently espoused the Duke’s [Wallenstein’s]
cause, and has been passionately describing the blessings of
peace, of which he has become aware in the course of a journey
while escorting Wallenstein’s daughter to the camp. As he

II. PARAPRAXES (1)

37

leaves the stage, his father [Octavio] and Questenberg, the
emissary from the Court, are plunged in consternation. Scene 5
continues:

Questenberg

Alas, alas! and stands it so?
What, friend! and do we let him go away
In this delusion—let him go away?
Not call him back immediately, not open
His eyes upon the spot?
Octavio (recovering himself out of a deep study) He now has open’d mine,
And I see more than pleases me.
What is it?
Quest.
Curse on this journey!
Oct.
But why so? What is it?
Quest.
Come, come along friend! I must follow up
Oct.
The ominous track immediately. Mine eyes
Are open’d now, and I must use them. Come!

(Draws Q. on with him.)
Quest.
What now? Where go you then?
Oct.
To her . ..
Quest.
To—
Oct. (correcting himself) To the Duke. Come let us go.
[Coleridge’s translation.]

Octavio had meant to say ‘to him’, to the Duke. But he makes a
slip of the tongue, and, by saying ‘to her’ he betrays to us at
least that he has clearly recognized the influence that has made
the young warrior into an enthusiast for peace.1
A still more impressive example has been discovered by Otto
Rank [1910a] in Shakespeare. It is from The Merchant of Venice,
in the famous scene in which the fortunate lover chooses be­
tween the three caskets, and perhaps I cannot do better than
read you Rank’s short account of it:
‘A slip of the tongue occurs in Shakespeare’s Merchant of
Venice (Act III, Scene 2), which is from the dramatic point of
view extremely subtly motivated and which is put to brilliant
technical use. Like the slip in Wallenstein to which Freud has
drawn attention, it shows that dramatists have a clear under­
standing of the mechanism and meaning of this kind of para­
praxis and assume that the same is true of their audience.
Portia, who by her father’s will has been bound to the choice
of a husband by lot, has so far escaped all her unwelcome
suitors by a fortunate chance. Having at last found in Bassanio
1 [This example and the following one also occur in P.E.L., 96-8.]

38

PARAPRAXES

the suitor who is to her liking, she has cause to fear that he too
will choose the wrong casket. She would very much like to tell
him that even so he could rest assured of her love; but she is
prevented by her vow. In this internal conflict the poet makes
her say to the suitor she favours:
I pray you tarry; pause a day or two
Before you hazard: for, in choosing wrong,
I lose your company; therefore forbear a while:
There’s something tells me (but it is not love)
I would not lose you ....
... I could teach you
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn;
So will I never be; so may you miss me;
But if you do you’ll make me wish a sin,
That I have been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
They have o’erlooked me, and divided me;

One half of me is yours, the other halfyours,—
Mine own, I would say, but if mine, then yours,
And so all yours.

The thing of which she wanted to give him only a very subtle
hint, because she should have concealed it from him altogether,
namely, that even before he made his choice she was wholly his
and loved him—it is precisely this that the poet, with a wonder­
ful psychological sensitivity, causes to break through openly in
her slip of the tongue; and by this artistic device he succeeds in
relieving both the lover’s unbearable uncertainty and the sus­
pense of the sympathetic audience over the outcome of his
choice.’
Observe, too, how skilfully Portia in the end reconciles the
two statements contained in her slip of the tongue, how she
solves the contradiction between them and yet finally shows that
it was the slip that was in the right:
‘But if mine, then yours,
And so all yours.’

It has occasionally happened that a thinker whose field lies
outside medicine has, by something he says, revealed the sense
of a parapraxis and anticipated our efforts at explaining them.
You all know of the witty satirist Lichtenberg (1742-99), of
whom Goethe said: ‘Where he makes a jest a problem lies con­
cealed.’ Sometimes the jest brings the solution of the problem to
light as well. In Lichtenberg’s Witzige und Satirische Einfdlle

II. PARAPRAXES (1)

39

[Witty and Satirical Thoughts, 1853] we find this: ‘He had
read so much Homer that he always read “Agamemnon” instead
of “angenommen [supposed]”.’ Here we have the whole theory of
misreading.1
We must see next time whether we can go along with these
writers in their view of parapraxes.
1 [Lichtenberg was a favourite author of Freud’s and many of his
epigrams are discussed in Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious (1905c).
The Agamemnon remark is further considered below, p. 70. It is
quoted in the book on jokes {Standard Ed., 8,93) as well as in P.E.L., 112,
where Goethe’s comment also appears {P.E.L., 218).]

LECTURE III

PARAPRAXES {continued)
Ladies and Gentlemen,—We arrived last time at the idea of
considering parapraxes not in relation to the intended function
which they disturbed but on their own account; and we formed
an impression that in particular cases they seemed to be betray­
ing a sense of their own. We then reflected that if confirmation
could be obtained on a wider scale that parapraxes have a
sense, their sense would soon become more interesting than the
investigation of the circumstances in which they come about.
Let us once more reach an agreement upon what is to be
understood by the ‘sense’ of a psychical process. We mean
nothing other by it than the intention it" serves and its position
in a psychical continuity. In most of our researches we can
replace ‘sense’ by ‘intention’ or ‘purpose’.1 Was it, then, merely
a deceptive illusion or a poetic exaltation of parapraxes when
we thought we recognized an intention in them?
We will continue to take slips of the tongue as our examples.
If we now look through a considerable number of observations
of that kind, we shall find whole categories of cases in which the
intention, the sense, of the slip is plainly visible. Above all there
are those in which what was intended is replaced by its con­
trary. The President of the Lower House [p. 34] said in his
opening speech: ‘I declare the sitting closed.’ That is quite
unambiguous. The sense and intention of his slip was that he
wanted to close the sitting. ‘Er sagt es ja selbst’12 we are tempted
to quote: we need only take him at his word. Do not interrupt
1 [It has been thought best to translate the German word ‘Tendenz’
by ‘purpose’ throughout these lectures. The meanings of the two words
do not, however, coincide, and in a few passages some such rendering
as ‘trend’ would be preferable. ‘ Tendenz' is almost never equivalent to
‘tendency’, though the adjective ‘tendenzios, has become naturalized in
the English form of ‘tendentious’, as applied, for instance, to a play
‘with a purpose’.]
2 [‘He says so himself.’ This is a line from the standard German
translation of a phrase in Figaro which occurs repeatedly in the sextet
in Act III.]
40

III. PARAPRAXES (2)

41

me at this point by objecting that that is impossible, that we
know that he did not want to close the sitting but to open it,
and that he himself, whom we have just recognized as the
supreme court of appeal, could confirm the fact that he wanted
to open it. You are forgetting that we have come to an agree­
ment that we will begin by regarding parapraxes on their own
account; their relation to the intention which they have dis­
turbed is not to be discussed till later. Otherwise you will be
guilty of a logical error by simply evading the problem that is
under discussion—by what is called in English ‘begging the
question’.
In other cases, where the slip does not express the precise
contrary, an opposite sense can nevertheless be brought out by
it. ‘I am not geneigt [inclined] to appreciate the services of my
predecessor’ [p. 33]. Geneigt is not the contrary of geeignet
[qualified], but it expresses openly something which contrasts
sharply with the situation in which the speech was to be made.
In yet other cases the slip of the tongue merely adds a second
sense to the one intended. The sentence then sounds like a con­
traction, abbreviation or condensation of several sentences.
Thus, when the energetic lady said: ‘He can eat and drink
what I want’ [p. 35], it was just as though she had said: ‘He
can eat and drink what he wants; but what has he to do with
wanting? I will want instead of him.’ A slip of the tongue often
gives the impression of being an abbreviation of this sort. For
instance, a Professor of Anatomy at the end of a lecture on the
nasal cavities asked whether his audience had understood what
he said and, after general assent, went on: ‘I can hardly be­
lieve that, since even in a city with millions of inhabitants,
those who understand the nasal cavities can be counted on one
finger. ... I beg your pardon, on the fingers of one hand.’ The
abbreviated phrase has a sense too—namely, that there is only
one person who understands them.1
In contrast to these groups of cases, in which the parapraxis
itself brings its sense to light, there are others in which the
parapraxis produces nothing that has any sense of its own, and
which therefore sharply contradict our expectations. If someone
twists a proper name about by a slip of the tongue or puts an
abnormal series of sounds together, these very common events
1 [Repeated, from P.E.L., 78.]

PARAPRAXES

42

alone seem to give a negative reply to our question whether all
parapraxes have some sort of sense. Closer examination of such
instances, however, shows that these distortions are easily
understood and that there is by no means so great a distinction
between these more obscure cases and the earlier straight­
forward ones.
A man who was asked about the health of his horse replied:
‘Well, it draut [a meaningless word] ... it dauert [will last]
another month perhaps.’ When he was asked what he had really
meant to say, he explained that he had thought it was a .
‘traurige [sad]’ story. The combination of ‘dauert' and ‘traurig'
had produced ‘draut'.1
Another man, speaking of some occurrences he disapproved
of, went on: ‘But then facts came to Vorschwein [a non-existent
word, instead of Vorschein (light)]. . . .’ In reply to enquiries
he confirmed the fact that he had thought these occurrences
‘Schweinereieri [‘disgusting’, literally ‘piggish’]. ‘Vorschein' and
‘Schweinereien' combined to produce the strange word ‘Vorschwein'.2
You will recall the case of the young man who asked the
unknown lady if he might ‘begleitdigeri her [p. 33]. We
ventured to divide up this verbal form into ‘begleiten [accom­
pany]’ and ‘beleidigen [insult]’, and we felt certain enough of this
interpretation not to need any confirmation of it. You will see
from these examples that even these obscurer cases of slips of
the tongue can be explained by a convergence, a mutual
‘interference', between two different intended speeches; the
differences between these cases of slips arise merely from the
fact that on some occasions one intention takes the place of the
other completely (becomes a substitute for it), as in slips of the
tongue that express the contrary, whereas on other occasions
the one intention has to be satisfied with distorting or modifying
the other, so that composite structures are produced, which
make sense, to a greater or lesser degree, on their own account.
We seem now to have grasped the secret of a large number of
slips of the tongue. If we bear this discovery in mind, we shall
be able to understand other groups as well which have puzzled
us hitherto. In cases of distortion of names, for instance, we
1 Meringer and Mayer. [P.E.L., 58.]
•

2 Meringer and Mayer. [P.KZ,., 57.]

III. PARAPRAXES (2)

43

cannot suppose that it is always a matter of competition between
two similar but different names. It is not difficult, however,
to guess the second intention. The distortion of a name occurs
often enough apart from slips of the tongue; it seeks to give
the name an offensive sound or to make it sound like something
inferior, and it is a familiar practice (or malpractice) designed
as an insult, which civilized people soon learn to abandon, but
which they are reluctant to abandon. It is still often permitted as
a ‘joke’, though a pretty poor one. As a blatant and ugly
example of this way of distorting names, I may mention that
in these days [of the first World War] the name of the President
of the French Republic, Poincare, has been changed into
‘Schweinskarre'.* It is therefore plausible to suppose that the
same insulting intention is present in these slips of the tongue
and is trying to find expression in the distortion of a name.
Similar explanations suggest themselves along the same lines
for certain instances of slips of the tongue with comic or absurd
results. ‘I call on you to hiccough [aufzustos$eri\ to the health
of our Chief [p. 32].’ Here a ceremonial atmosphere is un­
expectedly disturbed by the intrusion of a word which calls
up an unsavoury idea, and, on the model of certain insulting
and offensive phrases, we can scarcely avoid a suspicion that
a purpose was trying to find expression which was in violent
contradiction to the ostensibly respectful words. What the slip
seems to have been saying was something like: ‘Don’t you
believe it! I don’t mean this seriously! I don’t care a rap for
the fellow!’ Just the same thing applies to slips of the tongue
which turn innocent words into indecent or obscene ones:
thus, ‘Apopos’ for ‘a propos' or ‘Eischeissweibchen' for ‘Eiweissscheibcheri.2
Many people, as we know, derive some pleasure from a habit
like this of deliberately distorting innocent words into obscene
ones; such distortions are regarded as funny, and when we hear
one we must in fact first enquire from the speaker whether he
1 [The Viennese term for a pork chop.]
s Both from Meringer and Meyer. [They are also in P.E.L., 82. In the
first of these untranslatable examples 'Apopos' is a non-existent word; but
'Popo' is a nursery word for ‘bottom’. In the second example the
nonsense word means literally ‘egg-shit-female’, while the intended word
means ‘small slices of white of egg.’]
s.f.

xv—D

44

PARAPRAXES

uttered it intentionally as a joke or whether it happened as a
slip of the tongue.

Well, it looks now as though we have solved the problem
of parapraxes, and with very little trouble! They are not
chance events but serious mental acts; they have a sense; they
arise from the concurrent action—or perhaps rather, the mutu­
ally opposing action—of two different intentions. But now I see
too that you are preparing to overwhelm me with a mass of
questions and doubts which will have to be answered and dealt
with before we can enjoy this first outcome of our work. I
certainly have no desire to force hasty decisions upon you. Let
us take them all in due order, one after the other, and give them
cool consideration.
What is it you want to ask me? Do I think that this explana­
tion applies to all parapraxes or only to a certain number? Can
this same point of view be extended to the many other kinds of
parapraxis, to misreading, slips of the pen, forgetting, bungled
actions, mislaying, and so on? In view of the psychical nature
of parapraxes, what significance remains for the factors of
fatigue, excitement, absent-mindedness and interference with
the attention? Further, it is clear that of the two competing
purposes in a parapraxis one is always manifest, but the other
not always. What do we do, then, in order to discover the latter?
And, if we think we have discovered it, how do we prove that
it is not merely a probable one but the only correct one? Is
there anything else you want to ask? If not, I will go on myself.
You will recall that we do not set much store by parapraxes
themselves, and that all we want is to learn from studying them
something that may be turned to account for psycho-analysis.
I therefore put this question to you. What are these intentions
or purposes which are able to disturb others in this way? And
what are the relations between the disturbing purposes and the
disturbed ones? Thus, no sooner is the problem solved than our
work begins afresh.
First, then, is this the explanation of all cases of slips of the
tongue? I am very much inclined to think so, and my reason
is that every time one investigates an instance of a slip of the
tongue an explanation of this kind is forthcoming. But it is also
true that there is no way of proving that a slip of the tongue

III. PARAPRAXES (2)

45

cannot occur without this mechanism. It may be so; but
theoretically it is a matter of indifference to us, since the con­
clusions we want to draw for our introduction to psycho­
analysis remain, even though—which is certainly not the case—
our view holds good of only a minority of cases of slips of the
tongue. The next question—whether we may extend our view
to other sorts of parapraxis—I will answer in advance with a
‘yes’. You will be able to convince yourselves of this when we
come to examining instances of slips of the pen, bungled
actions, and so on. But for technical reasons I suggest that we
should postpone this task till we have treated slips of the tongue
themselves still more thoroughly.
A more detailed reply is called for by the question of what
significance remains for the factors put forward by the authori­
ties—disturbances of the circulation, fatigue, excitement, absent­
mindedness and the theory of disturbed attention—if we accept
the psychical mechanism of slips of the tongue which we have
described. Observe that we are not denying these factors. It is
in general not such a common thing for psycho-analysis to deny
something asserted by other people; as a rule it merely adds
something new—though no doubt it occasionally happens that
this thing that has hitherto been overlooked and is now brought
up as a fresh addition is in fact the essence of the matter. The
influence on the production of slips of the tongue by physio­
logical dispositions brought about by slight illness, disturbances
of the circulation or states of exhaustion, must be recognized at
once; daily and personal experience will convince you of it. But
how little they explain! Above all, they are not necessary pre­
conditions of parapraxes. Slips of the tongue are just as possible
in perfect health and in a normal state. These somatic factors
only serve therefore, to facilitate and favour the peculiar mental
mechanism of slips of the tongue. I once used an analogy to
describe this relation,1 and I will repeat it here since I can think
of none better to take its place. Suppose that one dark night I
went to a lonely spot and was there attacked by a rough who
took away my watch and purse. Since I did not see the robber’s
face clearly, I laid my complaint at the nearest police station
with the words: ‘Loneliness and darkness have just robbed me
of my valuables.’ The police officer might then say to me: ‘In
1 [P.E.L., 21.]

46

PARAPRAXES

what you say you seem to be unjustifiably adopting an extreme
mechanistic view. It would be better to represent the facts in
this way: “Under the shield of darkness and favoured by lone­
liness, an unknown thief robbed you of your valuables.” In
your case the essential task seems to me to be that we should
find the thief. Perhaps we shall then be able to recover the
booty.’
Such psycho-physiological factors as excitement, absent­
mindedness and disturbances of attention will clearly help us
very little towards an explanation. They are only empty
phrases, screens behind which we must not let ourselves be
prevented from having a look. The question is rather what it is
that has been brought about here by the excitement, the partic­
ular distracting of attention. And again, we must recognize
the importance of the influence of sounds, the similarity of
words and the familiar associations aroused by words. These
facilitate slips of the tongue by pointing to the paths they can
take. But if I have a path open to me, does that fact automatically
decide that I shall take it? I need a motive in addition before I
resolve in favour of it and furthermore a force to propel me
along the path. So these relations of sounds and words are also,
like the somatic dispositions, only things that favour slips of the
tongue and cannot provide the true explanation of them. Only
consider: in an immense majority of cases my speech is not
disturbed by the circumstance that the words I am using recall
others with a similar sound, that they are intimately linked
with their contraries or that familiar associations branch off
from them. Perhaps we might still find a way out by following
the philosopher Wundt, when he says that slips of the tongue
arise if, as a result of physical exhaustion, the inclination to
associate gains the upper hand over what the speaker otherwise
intends to say. That would be most convincing if it were not
contradicted by experience, which shows that in one set of cases
the somatic factors favouring slips of the tongue are absent and
in another set of cases the associative factors favouring them are
equally absent.
I am particularly interested, however, in your next question:
how does one discover the two mutually interfering purposes?
You do not realize, probably, what a momentous question this
is. One of the two, the purpose that is disturbed, is of course

III. PARAPRAXES (2)

47

unmistakable: the person who makes the slip of the tongue
knows it and admits to it. It is only the other, the disturbing
purpose, that can give rise to doubt and hesitation. Now, we
have already seen, and no doubt you have not forgotten, that
in a number of cases this other purpose is equally evident. It is
indicated by the outcome of the slip, if only we have the courage
to grant that outcome a validity of its own. Take the President
of the Lower House, whose slip of the tongue said the contrary
of what he intended. It is clear that he wanted to open the
sitting, but it is equally clear that he also wanted to close its
That is so obvious that it leaves us nothing to interpret. But
in the other cases, in which the disturbing purpose only distorts
the original one without itself achieving complete expression,
how do we arrive at the disturbing purpose from the distortion?
In a first group of cases this is done quite simply and securely
—in the same way, in fact, as with the disturbed purpose. We
get the speaker to give us the information directly. After his
slip of the tongue he at once produces the wording which he
originally intended: ‘It draut. . . no, it dauert [will last] another
month perhaps.’ [p. 42]. Well, in just the same way we get
him to tell us the disturbing purpose. ‘Why’, we ask him, ‘did you
say “rfraizZ”?’ He replies: ‘I wanted to say “It’s a traurige [sad]
story”.’ Similarly, in the other case, where the slip of the
tongue was ‘Vorschweiri [p. 42], the speaker confirms the fact
that he had wanted at first to say ‘It’s a Schweinerei [disgusting]’,
blit had controlled himself and gone off into another remark.
Here then the distorting purpose is as securely established as the
distorted one. My choice of these examples has not been un­
intentional, for their origin and solution come neither from me
nor from any of my followers. And yet in both these cases active
measures of a kind were necessary in order to bring about the
solution. The speaker had to be asked why he had made the
slip and what he could say about it. Otherwise he might perhaps
have passed over his slip without wanting to explain it. But
when he was asked he gave the explanation with the first thing
that occurred to him.1 And now please observe that this small
1 [The phrase ‘thing that occurred to him’ here stands for the German
word ‘Einfall’, for which there is no satisfactory English equivalent. The
word appears constantly in the course of these lectures—two or three
times in the present passage, repeatedly in Lecture VI, and at many

48

PARAPRAXES

active step and its successful outcome are already a psycho­
analysis and are a model for every psycho-analytic investigation
which we shall embark upon later.
Am I too mistrustful, however, if I suspect that at the very
moment at which psycho-analysis makes its appearance before
you resistance to it simultaneously raises its head? Do you not
feel inclined to object that the information given by the person
of whom the question was asked—the person who made the slip
of the tongue—is not completely conclusive? He was naturally
anxious, you think, to fulfil the request to explain the slip, so
he said the first thing that came into his head which seemed
capable of providing such an explanation. But that is no proof
that the slip did in fact take place in that way. It may have been
so, but it may just as well have happened otherwise. And some­
thing else might have occurred to him which would have fitted
in as well or perhaps even better.
It is strange how little respect you have at bottom for a
psychical fact! Imagine that someone had undertaken the
chemical analysis of a certain substance and had arrived at a
particular weight for one component of it—so and so many
milligrammes. Certain inferences could be drawn from this
weight. Now do you suppose that it would ever occur to a
chemist to criticize those inferences on the ground that the
isolated substance might equally have had some other weight?
Everyone will bow before the fact that this was the weight and
points elsewhere—so that some comment on it will be useful. It is
customarily translated ‘association’—an objectionable term, since it is
ambiguous and question-begging. If a person is thinking of something
and we say that he has an 'EinfalP, all that this implies is that something
else has occurred to his mind. But if we say that he has an ‘association’,
it seems to imply that the something else that has occurred to him is in
some way connected with what he was thinking of before. Much of the
discussion in these pages turns on whether the second thought is in fact
connected (or is necessarily connected) with the original one—whether
the ‘EinfaW is an ‘association’. So that to translate ‘EinfalV by ‘associa­
tion’ is bound to prejudge the issue. Nevertheless it is not always easy to
avoid this, more especially as Freud himself sometimes uses the German
‘Assoziation' as a synonym for ‘Einfair, especially in the term 'freie
Assoziatirm', which must inevitably be translated ‘free association’.
Every endeavour will be made in the present discussion to avoid ambi­
guity, even at the cost of some unwieldy phraseology; later on, the need
to avoid the word ‘association’ will become less pressing.]

III. PARAPRAXES (2)

49

none other and will confidently draw his further inferences from
it. But when you are faced with the psychical fact that a partic­
ular thing occurred to the mind of the person questioned, you
will not allow the fact’s validity: something else might have
occurred to him! You nourish the illusion of there being such
a thing as psychical freedom, and you will not give it up. I am
sorry to say I disagree with you categorically over this.
You will break off at that, but only to take up your resistance
again at another point. You proceed: ‘It is the special technique
of psycho-analysis, as we understand, to get people under
analysis themselves to produce the solution of their problems.
[Cf. p. 101 below.] Now let us take another example—the one
in which a speaker proposing the toast of honour on a cere­
monial occasion called on his audience to hiccough [aufzustossen] to the health of the Chief [p. 32]. You say [p. 43] that
the disturbing intention in this case was an insulting one: that
was what was opposing the speaker’s expression of respect. But
this is pure interpretation on your part, based upon observa­
tions apart from the slip of the tongue. If in this instance you
were to question the person responsible for the slip, he would
not confirm your idea that he intended an insult; on the con­
trary, he would energetically repudiate it. Why, in view of this
clear denial, do you not abandon your unprovable inter­
pretation?’
Yes. You have lighted on a powerful argument this time. I
can imagine the unknown proposer of the toast. He is probably
a subordinate to the Chief of the Department who is being
honoured—perhaps he himself is already an Assistant Lecturer,
a young man with excellent prospects in life. I try to force him
to admit that he may nevertheless have had a feeling that there
was something in him opposing his toast in honour of the Chief.
But this lands me in a nice mess. He gets impatient and suddenly
breaks out: ‘Just you stop trying to cross-question me or I shall
turn nasty. You’re going to ruin my whole career with your
suspicions. I simply said “aufstossen [hiccough to]” instead of
“anstossen [drink to]” because I’d said “auf” twice before in the
same sentence. That’s what Meringer calls a perseveration and
there’s nothing more to be interpreted about it. D’you under­
stand? BastaV—H’m! That was a surprising reaction, a truly
energetic denial. I see there’s nothing more to be done with

50

PARAPRAXES

the young man. But I also reflect that he shows a strong personal
interest in insisting on his parapraxis not having a sense. You
may also feel that there was something wrong in his being
quite so rude about a purely theoretical enquiry. But, you will
think, when all is said and done he must know what he wanted
to say and what he didn’t.
But must he? Perhaps that may still be the question.
Now, however, you think you have me at your mercy. ‘So
that’s your technique’, I hear you say. ‘When a person who has
made a slip of the tongue says something about it that suits you,
you pronounce him to be the final decisive authority on the
subject. “He says so himself! [p. 40]”. But when what he
says doesn’t suit your book, then all at once you say he’s of no
importance—there’s no need to believe him.’1
That is quite true. But I can put a similar case to you in
which the same monstrous event occurs. When someone charged
with an offence confesses his deed to the judge, the judge
believes his confession; but if he denies it, the judge does not
believe him. If it were otherwise, there would be no administra­
tion of justice, and in spite of occasional errors we must allow
that the system works.
‘Are you a judge, then? And is a person who has made a slip
of the tongue brought up before you on a charge? So making a
slip of the tongue is an offence, is it?’12
Perhaps we need not reject the comparison. But I would ask
you to observe what profound differences of opinion we have
reached after a little investigation of what seemed such innocent
problems concerning the parapraxes—differences which at the
moment we see no possible way of smoothing over. I propose a
provisional compromise on the basis of the analogy with the
judge and the defendant. I suggest that you shall grant me that
there can be no doubt of a parapraxis having a sense if the
subject himself admits it. I will admit in return that we cannot
arrive at a direct proof of the suspected sense if the subject
refuses us information, and equally, of course, if he is not at
hand to give us the information. Then, as in the case of the
1 [A long discussion of this difficulty will be found in one of Freud’s
last papers, on ‘Constructions in Analysis’ (1937d).]
2 [The German words are on the same pattern: 'Versprechen' and

'Vergehen'.]

III. PARAPRAXES (2)

51

administration of justice, we are obliged to' turn to circum­
stantial evidence, which may make a decision more probable in
some instances and less so in others. In the law courts it may be
necessary for practical purposes to find a defendant guilty on
circumstantial evidence. We are under no such necessity; but
neither are we obliged to disregard the circumstantial evidence.
It would be a mistake to suppose that a science consists entirely
of strictly proved theses, and it would be unjust to require this.
Only a disposition with a passion for authority will raise such a
demand, someone with a craving to replace his religious cate­
chism by another, though it is a scientific one. Science has only
a few apodeictic propositions in its catechism: the rest are
assertions promoted by it to some particular degree of prob­
ability. It is actually a sign of a scientific mode of thought to
find satisfaction in these approximations to certainty and to
be able to pursue constructive work further in spite of the
absence of final confirmation.
But if the subject does not himself give us the explanation of
the sense of a parapraxis, where are we to find the starting-points
for our interpretation—the circumstantial evidence? In various
directions. In the first place from analogies with phenomena
apart from parapraxes: when, for instance, we assert that dis­
torting a name when it occurs as a slip of the tongue has the
same insulting sense as a deliberate twisting of a name. Further,
from the psychical situation in which the parapraxis occurs, the
character of the person who makes the parapraxis, and the
impressions which he has received before the parapraxis and to
which the parapraxis is perhaps a reaction. What happens as
a rule is that the interpretation is carried out according to
general principles: to begin with there is only a suspicion, a
suggestion for an interpretation, and we then find a confirma­
tion by examining the psychical situation. Sometimes we have
to wait for subsequent events as well (which have, as it were,
announced themselves by the parapraxis) before our suspicion
is confirmed.
I cannot easily give you illustrations of this if I limit myself
to the field of slips of the tongue, though even there some good
instances are to be found. The young man who wanted to
‘begleitdigeri a lady [p. 33] was certainly a timid character.
The lady whose husband could eat and drink what she wanted

52

PARAPRAXES

[p. 35] is known to me as one of those energetic women who
wear the breeches in their home. Or let us take the following
example: At the General Meeting of the ‘Concordia’1 a young
member made a speech of violent opposition, in the course of
which he addressed the committee as ‘Vorschussmitglieder [lend­
ing members]’, a word which seems to be made up of ‘Vorstand
[directors]’ and ‘Ausschuss [committee]’. We shall suspect that
some disturbing purpose was at work in him, acting against his
violent oppositoin, based on something connected with a loan.
And in fact we learnt from our informant that the speaker was
constantly in financial difficulties and just at that time had
applied for a loan. The disturbing intention could therefore be
replaced by the thought: ‘Moderate your opposition; these are
the same people who will have to sanction your loan.’
But I can give you a large selection of circumstantial evidence
of this kind if I pass over to the wide field of the other
parapraxes.
If anyone forgets a proper name which is familiar to him
normally or if, in spite of all his efforts, he finds it difficult to
keep it in mind, it is plausible to suppose that he has something
against the person who bears the name so that he prefers not to
think of him. Consider, for instance, what we learn in the
following cases about the psychical situation in which the
parapraxis occurred.
‘A Herr Y. fell in love with a lady, but he met with no
success, and shortly afterwards she married a Herr X. There­
after, Herr Y., in spite of having known Herr X. for a long time
and even having business dealings with him, forgot his name
over and over again, so that several times he had to enquire
what it was from other people when he wanted to correspond
with Herr X.’ Herr Y. evidently wanted to know nothing of his
more fortunate rival: ‘never thought of shall he be.’12
Or: A lady enquired from her doctor for news of a common
acquaintance, but called her by her maiden name. She had
1 [The Society ofJournalists in Vienna. This anecdote will be found
in P.E.L., 88; it was originally supplied by Max Graf.]
2 From Jung [1907, 52. This appears in P.E.L., 25-6. The quotation
at the end, ‘Nicht gedacht soil seiner werden’, forms the first line and a
repeated refrain in a poem of Heine’s from the Nachlese, ‘Aus der
Matratzengruft’, No. IV.]

III. PARAPRAXES (2)

53

forgotten her friend’s married name. She admitted afterwards
that she had been very unhappy about the marriage and dis­
liked her friend’s husband.1
We shall have a good deal to say about forgetting names in
other connections [p. 74 f. below]; for the moment we are
principally interested in the psychical situation in which the
forgetting occurs.
The forgetting of intentions can in general be traced to an
opposing current of thought, which is unwilling to carry out the
intention. But this view is not only held by us psycho-analysts;
it is the general opinion, accepted by everyone in their daily
lives and only denied when it comes to theory. A patron who
gives his protege the excuse of having forgotten his request fails
to justify himself. The protegi immediately thinks: ‘It means
nothing to him; it’s true he promised, but he doesn’t really want
to do it.’2 For that reason forgetting is banned in certain
circumstances of ordinary life; the distinction between the
popular and the psycho-analytic view of these parapraxes seems
to have disappeared. Imagine the lady of the house receiving
her guest with the words: ‘What? have you come to-day? I’d
quite forgotten I invited you for to-day.’ Or imagine a young
man confessing to his fiancee that he had forgotten to keep their
last rendez-vous. He will certainly not confess it; he will prefer to
invent on the spur of the moment the most improbable obstacles
which prevented his appearing at the time and afterwards made
it impossible for him to let her know. We all know too that in
military affairs the excuse of having forgotten something is of no
help and is no protection against punishment, and we must all
feel that that is justified. Here all at once everyone is united in
thinking that a particular parapraxis has a sense and in know­
ing what that sense is. Why are they not consistent enough to
extend this knowledge to the other parapraxes and to admit
them fully? There is of course an answer to this question
too.
Since laymen have so little doubt about the sense of this
forgetting of intentions, you will be the less surprised to find
writers employing this sort of parapraxis in the same sense.
Any of you who have seen or read Bernard Shaw’s Caesar and
1 From Brill [1912, 191; also P.E.L., 224].
2 [This situation is considered further below, p. 72 f.]

54

PARAPRAXES

Cleopatra will remember that in the last scene Caesar, as he is
leaving Egypt, is haunted by the idea that there is something
else he had intended to do but has forgotten. In the end it turns
out what this was: he had forgotten to say good-bye to
Cleopatra. The dramatist is seeking by this little contrivance
to ascribe to the great Caesar a superiority which he did
not in fact possess and which he never desired. For historical
sources will tell you that Caesar made Cleopatra follow him to
Rome, that she was living there with her little Caesarion when
Caesar was murdered, and that she thereupon fled from the
city.1
Cases of forgetting an intention are in general so clear that
they are not of much use for our purpose of obtaining circum­
stantial evidence of the sense of a parapraxis from the psychical
situation. Let us therefore turn to a particularly ambiguous and
obscure kind of parapraxis—to losing and mislaying. You will
no doubt find it incredible that we ourselves can play an inten­
tional part in what is so often the painful accident of losing
something. But there are plenty of observations like the follow­
ing one. A young man lost a pencil of his of which he had been
very fond. The day before, he had received a letter from his
brother-in-law which ended with these words: ‘I have neither
the inclination nor the time at present to encourage you in your
frivolity and laziness.’ The pencil had actually been given to
him by this brother-in-law. Without this coincidence we could
not, of course, have asserted that a part was played in the loss
by an intention to get rid of the thing.2 Similar cases are very
common. We lose an object if we have quarrelled with the
person who gave it to us and do not want to be reminded of
him; or if we no longer like the object itself and want to have an
excuse for getting another and better one instead. The same
intention directed against an object can also play a part, of
course, in cases of dropping, breaking or destroying things. Can
we regard it as a matter of chance when a schoolchild immedi­
ately before his birthday loses, ruins or smashes some of his
personal belongings, such as his satchel or his watch?
Nor will anyone who has sufficiently often experienced the
torment of not being able to find something that he himself has
1 [This quotation from Shaw appears also in P.E.L., 154n.]
2 From Dattner. [P.E.L., 207.]

III. PARAPRAXES (2)

55

put away feel inclined to believe that there is a purpose in
mislaying things. Yet instances are far from rare in which the
circumstances attendant on the mislaying point to an intention
to get rid of the object temporarily or permanently.
Here is the best example, perhaps, of such an occasion. A
youngish man told me the following story: ‘Some years ago
there were misunderstandings between me and my wife. I
found her too cold, and although I willingly recognized her
excellent qualities we lived together without any tender feel­
ings. One day, returning from a walk, she gave me a book
which she had bought because she thought it would interest me.
I thanked her for this mark of “attention”, promised to read
the book and put it on one side. After that I could never find it
again. Months passed by, in which I occasionally remembered
the lost book and made vain attempts to find it. About six
months later my dear mother, who was not living with us, fell
ill. My wife left home to nurse her mother-in-law. The patient’s
condition became serious and gave my wife an opportunity of
showing the best side of herself. One evening I returned home
full of enthusiasm and gratitude for what my wife had accom­
plished. I walked up to my desk, and without any definite
intention but with a kind of somnambulistic certainty opened
one of the drawers. On the very top I found the long-lost book
I had mislaid.’1 With the extinction of the motive the mislaying
of the object ceased as well.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I could multiply this collection of
examples indefinitely; but I will not do so here. You will in
any case find a profusion of case material for the study of para­
praxes in my Psychopathology of Everyday Life (first published in
1901).1
2 All these examples lead to the same result: they make it
probable that parapraxes have a sense, and they show you how
that sense is discovered or confirmed by the attendant circum­
stances. I will be briefer to-day, because we have adopted the
limited aim of using the study of these phenomena as a help
towards a preparation for psycho-analysis. There are only two
1 [This appears in P.E.L., 49.]
2 See also similar collections by Maeder [1906-7] (in French), Brill
[1912] (in English), Jones [1911] (in English) and J. Starcke [1916]
(in Dutch), etc.

56

PARAPRAXES

groups of observations into which I need enter more fully here:
accumulated and combined parapraxes and the confirmation
of our interpretations by subsequent events.
Accumulated and combined parapraxes are without doubt
the finest flower of their kind. If we had only been concerned
to prove that parapraxes have a sense we should have confined
ourselves to them from the first, for in their case the sense is
unmistakable even to the dull-witted and forces itself on the
most critical judgement. An accumulation of these phenomena
betrays an obstinacy that is scarcely ever a characteristic of
chance events but fits in well with something intentional.
Finally, the mutual interchangeability between different species
of parapraxes demonstrates what it is in parapraxes that is
important and characteristic: not their form or the method
which they employ but the purpose which they serve and which
can be achieved in the most various ways. For this reason I will
give you an instance of repeated forgetting. Ernest Jones [1911,
483] tells us that once, for reasons unknown to him, he left a
letter lying on his desk for several days. At last he decided to
send it off, but he had it returned to him by the Dead Letter
Office1 since he had forgotten to address it. After he had
addressed it he took it to the post, but this time it had no stamp.
And then at last he was obliged to admit his reluctance to
sending the letter off at all.
In another case a bungled action is combined with an in­
stance of mislaying. A lady travelled to Rome with her brother­
in-law, who was a famous artist. The visitor was received with
great honour by the German community in Rome, and among
other presents he was given an antique gold medal. The lady
was vexed that her brother-in-law did not appreciate the lovely
object sufficiently. When she returned home (her place in
Rome having been taken by her sister) she discovered while
unpacking that she had brought the medal with her—how, she
did not know. She at once sent a letter with the news to her
brother-in-law, and announced that she would send the article
she had walked off with back to Rome next day. But next day
the medal had been so cleverly mislaid that it could not be
found and sent off; and it was at this point, that the meaning
1 [In English in the original. This example and the next two appear

P.E.L., 230-1.]

III. PARAPRAXES (2)

57

of her ‘absent-mindedness’ dawned on the lady: she wanted to
keep the object for herself.1
I have already given you an example of a combination of
a forgetting with an error, the case of someone forgetting an
appointment and on a second occasion, having firmly decided
not to forget this time, turning up at the wrong hour [p. 30].
An exactly similar case was reported to me from his own
experience by a friend with literary as well as scientific interests.
‘Some years ago’, he told me, ‘I allowed myself to be elected to
the committee of a certain literary society, as I thought that the
organization might one day be able to help me to have my
play produced; and I took a regular part, though without being
much interested, in the meetings which were held every Friday.
Then, a few months ago, I was given the promise of a produc­
tion at the theatre at F.; and since then I have regularlyforgotten
the meetings of the society. When I read your book on the
subject I felt ashamed of my forgetfulness. I reproached myself
with the thought that it was shabby behaviour on my part to
stay away now that I no longer needed these people, and
resolved on no account to forget the next Friday. I kept on
reminding myself of this resolution until I carried it into effect
and stood at the door of the room where the meetings were
held. To my astonishment it was locked; the meeting was
over. I had in fact made a mistake over the day; it was now
Saturday!’
It would be agreeable to add further, similar examples. But
I must proceed, and give you a glimpse of the cases in which
our interpretation has to wait for the future for confirmation.
The governing condition of these cases, it will be realized, is
that the present psychical situation is unknown to us or in­
accessible to our enquiries. Our interpretation is consequently
no more than a suspicion to which we ourselves do not attach
too much importance. Later, however, something happens
which shows us how well-justified our interpretation had been.
I was once the guest of a young married couple and heard the
young woman laughingly describe her latest experience. The
day after her return from the honeymoon she had called for her
unmarried sister to go shopping with her as she used to do,
while her husband went to his business. Suddenly she noticed
1 Reported by R. Reitler.

58

PARAPRAXES

a gentleman on the other side of the street, and nudging her
sister had cried: ‘Look, there goes Herr L.’ She had forgotten
that this gentleman had been her husband for some weeks. I
shuddered as I heard the story, but I did not dare to draw the
inference. The little incident only occurred to my mind some
years later when the marriage had come to a most unhappy
end.1
Maeder tells of a lady who, on the eve of her wedding had
forgotten to try on her wedding-dress and, to her dressmaker’s
despair, only remembered it late in the evening. He connects
this forgetfulness with the fact that she was soon divorced from
her husband. I know a lady now divorced from her husband,
who in managing her money affairs frequently signed docu­
ments in her maiden name, many years before she in fact re­
sumed it.—I know of other women who have lost their
wedding-rings during the honeymoon, and I know too that the
history of their marriages has given a sense to the accident.—
And now here is one more glaring example, but with a happier
ending. The story is told of a famous German chemist that his
marriage did not take place, because he forgot the hour of his
wedding and went to the laboratory instead of to the church.
He was wise enough to be satisfied with a single attempt and
died at a great age unmarried.
The idea may possibly have occurred to you that in these
examples parapraxes have taken the place of the omens or
auguries of the ancients. And indeed some omens were
nothing else than parapraxes, as, for instance, when someone
stumbled or fell down. Others of them, it is true, had the char­
acter of objective happenings and not of subjective acts. But
you would hardly believe how difficult it sometimes is to decide
whether a particular event belongs to the one group or to the
other. An act so often understands how to disguise itself as a
passive experience.
All those of us who can look back on a comparatively long
experience of life will probably admit that we should have
spared ourselves many disappointments and painful surprises if
we had found the courage and determination to interpret small
parapraxes experienced in our human contacts as auguries and
to make use of them as indications of intentions that were still
1 [This example and the two next will be found P.E.L., 203-4.]

III. PARAPRAXES (2)

59

concealed. As a rule we dare not do so; it would make us feel
as though, after a detour through science, we were becoming
superstitious again. Nor do all auguries come true, and you
will understand from our theories that they do not all need to
come true.

S.F. XV—E

LECTURE IV

PARAPRAXES {concluded)
Ladies and Gentlemen,—We may take it as the outcome of
our efforts so far and the basis of our further investigations that
parapraxes have a sense. Let me insist once again that I am
not asserting—and for our purposes there is no need to do so—
that every single parapraxis that occurs has a sense, even
though I regard that as probably the case. It is enough for us
if we can point to such a sense relatively often in the different
forms of parapraxis. Moreover, in this respect these different
forms behave differently. Cases of slips of the tongue and of the
pen, etc., may occur on a purely physiological basis. I cannot
believe that this is so in the types depending on forgetting (for­
getting names or intentions, mislaying, etc.). It is very probable
that there are cases of losing which can be regarded as un­
intended. It is in general true that only a certain proportion
of the errors that occur in ordinary life can be looked at from
our point of view. You should bear these limitations in mind
when henceforward we start from the assumption that para­
praxes are psychical acts and arise from mutual interference
between two intentions.
This is the first product of psycho-analysis. Psychology has
hitherto known nothing of the occurrence of such mutual inter­
ferences or of the possibility that they might result in such
phenomena. We have made a quite considerable extension to
the world of psychical phenomena and have won for psycho­
logy phenomena which were not reckoned earlier as belonging
to it.
Let us pause a moment longer over the assertion that para­
praxes are ‘psychical acts’. Does this imply more than what we
have said already—that they have a sense? I think not. I think,
rather, that the former assertion [that they are psychical acts]
is more indefinite and more easily misunderstood. Anything
that is observable in mental life may occasionally be described
as a mental phenomenon. The question will then be whether the
particular mental phenomenon has arisen immediately from
60

IV. PARAPRAXES (3)

61

somatic, organic and material influences—in which case its
investigation will not be part of psychology—or whether it is
derived in the first instance from other mental processes, some­
where behind which the series of organic influences begins. It
is this latter situation that we have in view when we describe
a phenomenon as a mental process, and for that reason it is
more expedient to clothe our assertion in the form: ‘the pheno­
menon has a sense.’ By ‘sense’ we understand ‘meaning’,
‘intention,’ ‘purpose’ and ‘position in a continuous psychical
context’. [Cf. p. 40.]
There are a number of other phenomena which are closely
akin to parapraxes but to which that name is no longer appro­
priate. We call them chance and symptomatic actions. Like the
others, they have the character of being without a motive,
insignificant and unimportant; but they have in addition, more
clearly, that of being unnecessary. They are distinguished from
parapraxes by their lack of another intention with which they
are in collision and which is disturbed by them. On the other
hand, they merge insensibly into the gestures and movements
which we regard as expressions of the emotions. These chance
actions include all sorts of manipulations with our clothing, or
parts of our body or objects within our reach, performed as
though in play and apparently with no purpose, or, again, the
omission of these manipulations; or, further, tunes that we hum
to ourselves. I suggest that all these phenomena have a sense
and can be interpreted in the same way as parapraxes, that they
are small indications of more important mental processes and
are fully valid psychical acts. But I do not propose to linger
over this fresh extension of the field of mental phenomena; I
shall return to the parapraxes, in connection with which prob­
lems important for psycho-analysis can be worked out with
far greater clarity.1

The most interesting questions which we have raised about
parapraxes and not yet answered are perhaps these. We have
said that parapraxes are the product of mutual interference
between two different intentions, of which one may be called
the disturbed intention and the other the disturbing one. The
1 [Symptomatic and chance actions form the subject of Chapter IX
of P.E.L.]

PARAPRAXES
62
disturbed intentions give no occasion for further questions, but
concerning the latter we should like to know, first, what sort
of intentions emerge as a disturbance to others, and secondly
what is the relation of the disturbing intentions to the disturbed
ones?
If you will allow me, I will once more take slips of the tongue
as representatives of the whole class and I will reply to the
second question before the first.
In a slip of the tongue the disturbing intention may be related
in its content to the disturbed one, in which case it will contradict
it or correct it or supplement it. Or—the more obscure and
more interesting case—the content of the disturbing intention
may have nothing to do with that of the disturbed one.
We shall have no difficulty in finding evidence of the former
relation in instances we already know and in similar ones. In
almost every case in which a slip of the tongue reverses the
sense, the disturbing intention expresses the contrary to the
disturbed one and the parapraxis represents a conflict between
two incompatible inclinations. ‘I declare the sitting opened, but
I should prefer it to be already closed’ is the sense of the
President’s slip of the tongue [p. 34]. A political periodical
which had been accused of corruption defended itself in an
article the climax of which should have been: ‘Our readers will
bear witness to the fact that we have always acted in the most
unself-seeking manner for the good of the community.’ But the
editor entrusted with the preparation of the article wrote ‘in
the most self-seeking manner’. That is to say, he was thinking:
‘This is what I am obliged to write; but I have different ideas.’
A [German] member of parliament who was insisting that the
truth should be told to the Emperor ‘ruckhaltlos [unreservedly]’
evidently heard an inner voice that was shocked at his boldness
and, by a slip of the tongue, changed the word into lrHckgratlos
[spinelessly]’.1
In the instances already familiar to you which give an im­
pression of being contractions or abbreviations, what we have
before us are corrections, additions or continuations, by means
of which a second purpose makes itself felt alongside of the

1 This was in the German Reichstag in November 1908. [A fuller
account of this appears P.E.L., 95-6. The preceding slip will be found

P.E.L., 120-1.]

IV. PARAPRAXES (3)

63

first. ‘Facts came to Vorschein [light]—better to say it straight
out—they were Schweinereien [disgusting]; well then, facts came
to Vorschwein [p. 42].’ ‘Those who understand this can be
counted on the fingers of one hand—no, there’s really only one
person who understands it, so: can be counted on one finger
[p. 41].’ Or: ‘My husband can eat and drink what he wants.
But, as you know, I don’t put up with his wanting anything at
all, so: he can eat and drink what I want [p. 35].’ In all these
cases, then, the slip of the tongue arises from the content of the
disturbed intention itself or is connected with it.
The other sort of relation between the two mutually interfer­
ing intentions seems puzzling. If the disturbing intention has
nothing to do with the disturbed one, where can it have come
from and why is it that it makes itself noticeable as a disturbance
at this particular point? The observation which can alone give
us the answer to this shows that the disturbance arises from a
train of thought which has occupied the person concerned a
short time before and, whether it has already been expressed
in speech or not, produces this subsequent effect. It must in fact,
therefore, be described as a perseveration, though not necessarily
as the perseveration of spoken words. In this case too an associa­
tive link between the disturbing and the disturbed intentions is
present; but it does not lie in their content but is artificially
constructed, often along extremely forced associative paths.
Here is a simple example of this, derived from my own
observation. I once met two Viennese ladies in the lovely
Dolomites, who were dressed in walking clothes. I accompanied
them part of the way, and we discussed the pleasures and also
the trials of spending a holiday in that way. One of the ladies
admitted that spending the day like that entailed a good deal of
discomfort. ‘It is certainly not at all pleasant’, she said, ‘if one
has been tramping all day in the sun and has perspired right
through one’s blouse and chemise.’ In this sentence she had to
overcome a slight hesitation at one point. Then she continued:
‘But then when one gets “nach Hose" and can change....’ This
slip of the tongue was not analysed but I expect you can under­
stand it easily. The lady’s intention had obviously been to give
a more complete list of her clothes: blouse, chemise and Hose
[drawers]. Reasons of propriety led her to omit any mention of
the ‘Hose*. But in the next sentence, with its quite independent

64

PARAPRAXES

content, the unspoken word emerged as a distortion of the
similar-sounding ‘nach Hause [home]’.1

We can now turn, however, to the main question, which we
have long postponed, of what sort of intentions these are, which
find expression in this unusual fashion as disturbers of other
intentions. Well, they are obviously of very different sorts,
among which we must look for the common factor. If we
examine a number of examples with this in view, they will soon
fall into three groups. The first group contains those cases in
which the disturbing purpose is known to the speaker and more­
over had been noticed by him before he made the slip of the
tongue. Thus, in the ‘ Vorschwein’ slip [p. 42] the speaker
admitted not only that he had formed the judgement ‘Schweinereien’ about the events in question, but also that he had had
the intention, from which he afterwards drew back, of express­
ing his judgement in words. A second group is made up of other
cases in which the disturbing purpose is equally recognized as
his by the speaker, but in which he was unaware that it was
active in him just before he made the slip. Thus, he accepts our
interpretation of his slip, but nevertheless remains to some extent
surprised at it. Instances of this kind of attitude can perhaps be
found in other sorts of parapraxes more easily than in slips of
the tongue. In a third group the interpretation of the disturbing
intention is vigorously rejected by the speaker; he not only
denies that it was active in him before he made the slip, but
seeks to maintain that it is entirely foreign to him. You will
recall the example of the ‘hiccough’ [p. 49] and the positively
rude denial which I brought on myself from the speaker by
uncovering his disturbing intention. As you know, we have not
yet come to any agreement in our views on these cases. I should
pay no attention to the denial put forward by the proposer of
the toast and should persist in my interpretation unruffled,
while you, I suppose, are still affected by his protest and raise
the question of whether we ought not to give up interpreting
parapraxes of this kind and regard them as purely physiological
acts in the pre-analytic sense. I can well imagine what it is that
deters you. My interpretation carries with it the hypothesis that
1 [Freud later included this anecdote in the 1917 edition of P.E.L.,
64-5.]

IV. PARAPRAXES (3)

65

intentions can find expression in a speaker of which he himself
knows nothing but which I am able to infer from circumstantial
evidence. You are brought up short in the face of such a novel
and momentous hypothesis. I can understand that, and I see
your point so far as that goes. But one thing is certain. If you
want to apply consistently the view of parapraxes which has
been confirmed by so many examples, you will have to make
up your mind to accept the strange hypothesis I have men­
tioned. If you cannot do that, you will have once more to
abandon the understanding of parapraxes which you have only
just achieved.
Let us consider for a moment what it is that unites the three
groups, what it is that the three mechanisms of slips of the
tongue have in common. It is fortunately unmistakable. In the
first two groups the disturbing purpose is recognized by the
speaker; furthermore, in the first group that purpose announces
itself immediately before the slip. But in both cases it is forced
back. The speaker decides not to put it into words, and after that the
slip of the tongue occurs: after that, that is to say, the purpose which has
been forced back is put into words against the speaker's will, either by
altering the expression of the intention which he has permitted, or by
mingling with it, or by actually taking its place. This, then, is the
mechanism of a slip of the tongue.
On my view, I can bring what happens in the third group
into complete harmony with the mechanism I have described.
I have only to assume that what distinguishes these three groups
from one another is the differing extent to which the intention
is forced back. In the first group the intention is there and makes
itself noticed before the speaker’s remark; only then is it
rejected; and it takes its revenge in the slip of the tongue. In
the second group the rejection goes further: the intention has
already ceased to be noticeable before the remark is made.
Strangely enough, this does not in the least prevent it from
playing its part in causing the slip. But this behaviour makes it
easier for us to explain what happens in the third group. I shall
venture to assume that a purpose can also find expression in a
parapraxis when it has been forced back and not noticed for a
considerable time, for a very long time perhaps, and can for
that reason be denied straight out by the speaker. But even if
you leave the problem of the third group on one side, you are

66

PARAPRAXES

bound to conclude from the observations we have made in the
other cases that the suppression of the speaker's intention to say some­
thing is the indispensable condition for the occurrence of a slip of the
tongue.
We may now claim to have made further advances in our
understanding of parapraxes. We know not only that they are
mental acts, in which we can detect sense and intention, not
only that they come about through mutual interference between
two different intentions, but beyond this we know that one of
these intentions must have been in some way forced back from
being put into effect before it can manifest itself as a disturbance
of the other intention. It must itself have been disturbed before
it can become a disturber. This does not mean, of course, that
we have yet achieved a complete explanation of the phenomena
which we call parapraxes. We see further questions immediately
cropping up, and we suspect in general that the further our
understanding goes the more occasions there will be for raising
fresh questions. We may ask, for instance, why things should
not be much simpler. If the intention is to force back a partic­
ular purpose instead ofcarrying it into effect, the forcing back
should be successful, so that the purpose does not manifest itself
at all; or on the other hand the forcing back might fail, so that
the purpose that was to have been forced back would manifest
itself completely. But parapraxes are the outcome of a com­
promise: they constitute a half-success and a half-failure for
each of the two intentions; the intention which is being chal­
lenged is neither completely suppressed nor, apart from special
cases, carried through quite unscathed. We may conclude that
special conditions must prevail in order that an interference or
compromise of this kind shall come about, but we can form no
conception of what they can be. Nor do I think that we could
discover these unknown factors by going deeper into the study
of parapraxes. It will be necessary, rather, to examine first
yet other obscure regions of mental life: it is only from analogies
which we shall meet with there that we shall find the courage to
set up the hypotheses necessary for throwing a more penetrating
light upon parapraxes. And one thing more. Working from
small indications, as we are constantly in the habit of doing
in the present field, brings its own dangers. There is a mental
disease, ‘combinatory paranoia’, in which the exploitation of

IV. PARAPRAXES (3)

67

small indications like these is carried to unlimited lengths; and
I will not of course claim that conclusions built on such founda­
tions are invariably correct. We can only be guarded against
these risks by the broad basis of our observations, the repetition
of similar impressions from the most varied spheres of mental
life.
At this point, therefore, we will leave the analysis of para­
praxes. But there is one point more to which I would draw your
attention. I would ask you to bear in mind as a model the
manner in which we have treated these phenomena. From this
example you can learn the aims of our psychology. We seek
not merely to describe and to classify phenomena, but to under­
stand them as signs of an interplay of forces in the mind, as a
manifestation of purposeful intentions working concurrently or
in mutual opposition. We are concerned with a dynamic view
of mental phenomena. On our view the phenomena that are
perceived must yield in importance to trends which are only
hypothetical.

We shall therefore not enter more deeply into parapraxes,
but we may still undertake a cursory survey of the extent of
this field, in the course of which we shall come once more upon
things we already know but shall also discover some novelties.
In this survey I shall keep to the division into three groups
which I proposed to begin with:1 slips of the tongue together
with their cognate forms (slips of the pen, misreading and mis­
hearing); forgetting, subdivided according to the objects for­
gotten (proper names, foreign words, intentions or impressions);
and bungled actions, mislaying and losing. Errors, in so far as
they concern us, fall under the headings partly of forgetting
and partly of bungled actions.
We have already treated slips of the tongue in great detail,
but there are a few more points to be added. Slips of the tongue
are accompanied by certain minor emotional phenomena which
are not quite without interest. No one likes making slips of the
1 [At the beginning of Lecture II (p. 25). These ‘three groups’ are
not to be confused with the ‘three groups’ discussed on pp. 64-5,
which relate to the quite other matter of the attitude towards slips of
the tongue adopted by those who make them.]

68

PARAPRAXES

tongue, and we often fail to hear our own slips, though never
other people’s. Slips of the tongue are also in a certain sense con­
tagious; it is not at all easy to talk about slips of the tongue with­
out making slips of the tongue oneself. The most trivial forms of
such slips, precisely those which have no special light to throw on
hidden mental processes, have reasons which are nevertheless not
hard to penetrate. For instance, ifsomeone has pronounced a long
vowel short on account of a disturbance affecting the word for
some reason or other, he will soon afterwards pronounce a
subsequent short vowel long, thus making a fresh slip of the
tongue to compensate for the earlier one. In the same way, if he
pronounces a diphthong incorrectly and carelessly (for instance
pronouncing an ‘eu’ or *oi* as ‘ei’)he will try to make up for it by
changing a subsequent fei’ into an ‘eu’ or ‘oi\ The decisive
factor here seems to be consideration of the impression made on
the audience, who are not to suppose that it is a matter of
indifference to the speaker how he treats his mother-tongue.
The second, compensating distortion actually has the purpose
of directing the hearer’s attention to the first one and of assuring
him that the speaker has noticed it too. The commonest,
simplest and most trivial slips of the tongue are contractions
and anticipations [cf. p. 32] which occur in insignificant parts
of speech. For instance, in a longish sentence one may make a
slip of the tongue which anticipates the last word of what one
intends to say. This gives an impression of impatience to be
finished with the sentence, and is evidence in general of a
certain antipathy against communicating the sentence or
against the whole of one’s remarks. We thus arrive at marginal
cases in which the distinctions between the psycho-analytic
view of slips of the tongue and the ordinary physiological one
melt into one another. It is to be assumed that a purpose of
disturbing the intention of the speech is present in these cases
but that it can only announce its presence and not what it itself
has in view. The disturbance it produces then proceeds in
accordance with certain phonetic influences or associative
attractions and can be regarded as a distraction of the attention
from the intention of the speech. But neither this disturbance of
the attention nor the inclinations to associate which have
become operative touch on the essence of the process. This
remains, in spite of everything, the indication of the existence

IV. PARAPRAXES (3) ’

69

of an intention which is disturbing to the intention of the speech,
though the nature of this disturbing intention cannot be guessed
from its consequences, as is possible in all the better defined
cases of slips of the tongue.
Slips of the pen, to which I now pass, are so closely akin to
slips of the tongue that we have nothing new to expect from
them. Perhaps we may glean one little further point. The
extremely common small slips of the pen, contractions and
anticipations of later words (especially of final words) point,
once again, to a general dislike of writing and impatience to
be done with it. More marked products of miswriting enable one
to recognize the nature and aim of the disturbing purpose. If
one finds a slip of the pen in a letter, one knows in general that
there was something the matter with its author, but one cannot
always discover what was going on in him. A slip of the pen is
just as often overlooked by the person responsible as is a slip
of the tongue. The following is a noteworthy observation. There
are, as we know, people who are in the habit of reading through
every letter they write before sending it off. Others do not do
this as a rule; but if, as an exception, they do so they always
come across some conspicuous slip of the pen, which they can
then correct. How is this to be explained? It looks as though
these people knew that they had made a mistake in writing the
letter. Are we really to believe this?
An interesting problem attaches to the. practical importance of
slips of the pen. You may perhaps remember the case of a
murderer, H., who found the means of obtaining cultures of
highly dangerous pathogenic organisms from scientific in­
stitutes by representing himself as a bacteriologist. He then used
these cultures for the purpose of getting rid of his near connec­
tions by this most modern of methods. Now on one occasion this
man complained to the Directors of one of these institutes that
the cultures that had been sent to him were ineffective; but he
made a slip of the pen, and instead of writing ‘in my experi­
ments on mice or guinea-pigs’ he wrote quite clearly ‘in my
experiments on men’.1 The doctors at the institute were struck
by the slip, but, so far as I know, drew no conclusions from it.
Well, what do you think? Should not the doctors, on the con­
trary, have taken the slip of the pen as a confession and started
1 ^Menschen' instead of ‘Mausen. oder Meerschweinchen'.]

70

PARAPRAXES

an investigation which would have put an early stop to the
murderer’s activities? Was not ignorance of our view of para­
praxes responsible in this case for an omission of practical
significance? Well, I think a slip of the pen like this would
certainly have seemed to me most suspicious; but something of
great importance stands in the way of using it as a confession.
The matter is not as simple as all that. The slip was certainly a
piece of circumstantial evidence; but it was not enough in itself
to start an investigation. It is true that the slip of the pen said
that he was concerned with thoughts of infecting men, but it
did not make it possible to decide whether these thoughts were
to be taken as a clear intention to injure or as a phantasy of no
practical importance. It is even possible that a man who had
made a slip like this would have every subjective justification for
denying the phantasy and would repudiate it as something
entirely foreign to him. You will understand these possibilities
still better when later on we come to consider the distinction
between psychical and material reality.1 But this is another
instance of a parapraxis acquiring importance from subsequent
events. [Cf. p. 57 f. above.]
With misreading we come to a psychical situation which
differs sensibly from that in slips of the tongue or pen. Here one
of the two mutually competing purposes is replaced by a
sensory stimulation and is perhaps on that account less resistant.
What one is going to read is not a derivative of one’s own mental
life like something one proposes to write. In a great majority of
cases, therefore, a misreading consists in a complete substitution.
One replaces the word that is to be read by another, without
there necessarily being any connection of content between the
text and the product of the misreading, which depends as a
rule on verbal similarity. The best member of this group is
Lichtenberg’s ‘Agamemnon’ for ‘angenommen’ [p. 39 above]. If
we want to discover the disturbing purpose which produced the
misreading we must leave the text that has been misread
entirely aside and we may begin the analytic investigation with
the two questions: what is the first association to the product
of the misreading? and in what situation did the misreading
occur? Occasionally a knowledge of the latter is alone enough
to explain the misreading. For instance, a man under the
1 [See the discussion in Lecture XXIII, p. 368 below.]

IV. PARAPRAXES (3)

71

pressure of an imperious need was wandering about in a strange
town when he saw the word ‘Closet-House’ on a large notice­
board on the first storey of a building. He had just enough time
to feel surprised at the notice-board being placed so high up
before discovering that, strictly speaking, what he should have
read was ‘Corset-House’? In other cases a misreading precisely of
the kind which is quite independent of the content of the text
may call for a detailed analysis which cannot be carried
through without practice in the technique of psycho-analysis
.' nd without reliance on it. As a rule, however, it is not so hard
to find the explanation of a misreading: the word substituted
immediately betrays, as in the Agamemnon example, the circle
of ideas from which the disturbance has arisen. In this time of
war, for instance, it is a very usual thing for the names of towns
and generals and the military terms that are constantly buzzing
around us to be read wherever a similar word meets our eyes.
Whatever interests and concerns us puts itself in the place of
what is strange and still uninteresting. After-images of [earlier]
thoughts trouble new perceptions.
With misreading, too, there is no lack of cases of another
sort, in which the text of what is read itself arouses the disturb­
ing purpose, which thereupon, as a rule, turns it into its
opposite. What we ought to read is something unwished-for,
and analysis will convince us that an intense wish to reject what
we have read must be held responsible for its alteration.
In the more frequent cases of misreading which we mentioned
first, we miss two factors to which we have assigned an im­
portant role in the mechanism of parapraxes: a conflict between
two purposes and a forcing-back of one of them which takes its
revenge by producing a parapraxis. Not that anything contrary
to this occurs in misreading. But the prominence of the thought
that leads to the misreading is far more noticeable than the
forcing-back which it may have experienced previously.
It is these two factors which we meet with most markedly in
the different situations in which parapraxes of forgetting occur.
The forgetting of intentions is quite unambiguous; as we have
already seen [p. 53], its interpretation is not disputed even by
laymen. The purpose which disturbs the intention is in every
1 [Later included in the 1917 edition of P.E.L., 113-14.]

72

PARAPRAXES

instance a counter-intention, an unwillingness; and all that
remains for us to learn about it is why it has not expressed itself
in some other and less disguised manner. But the presence of
this counter-will1 is unquestionable. Sometimes, too, we succeed
in guessing something of the motives which compel this counter­
will to conceal itself; acting surreptitiously by means of the para­
praxis it always achieves its aim, whereas it would be sure of
repudiation if it emerged as an open contradiction. If some
important change in the psychical situation takes place between
the forming of the intention and its carrying-out, as a result of
which there is no longer any question of the intention being
carried out, then the forgetting of the intention drops out of the
category of parapraxes. It no longer seems strange to have
forgotten it, and we realize that it would have been unnecessary
to remember it: thereafter it becomes permanently or tempor­
arily extinct. The forgetting of an intention can only be called
a parapraxis if we cannot believe that the intention has been
interrupted in this latter way.
The instances of forgetting an intention are in general so
uniform and so perspicuous that for that very reason they are of
no interest for our investigation. Nevertheless there are two
points at which we can learn something new from a study of
these parapraxes. Forgetting—that is, failure to carry out—
an intention points, as we have said, to a counter-will that is
hostile to it. This is no doubt true; but our enquiries show that
the counter-will can be of two kinds—direct or indirect. What
I mean by the latter will best appear from one or two examples.
If a patron forgets to put in a word with a third person on behalf
of his protege, this may happen because he is riot really very
much interested in the protege and therefore has no great desire
to speak on his behalf. In any case, that is how the protege will
understand the patron’s forgetting [cf. p. 53]. But things may
be more complicated. The counter-will in the patron against
carrying out the intention may come from another direction
and may be aimed at quite a different point. It may have
nothing to do with the protege but may perhaps be directed
1 [The concept of a ‘counter-will’ played a prominent part in some
of Freud’s very first papers on psychopathology, e.g., in ‘A Case of
Successful Treatment by Hypnotism’ (1892-3). It reappears at several
points in P.K£.]

IV. PARAPRAXES (3)

73

against the third person to whom the recommendation was to
have been made. So you see from this once more [cf. p. 70]
the doubts that stand in the way of a practical application of
our interpretations. In spite of the correct interpretation of the
forgetting, the protege is in danger of being too distrustful and of
doing his patron a grave injustice. Or, supposing someone
forgets an appointment which he has promised someone else
to keep, the most frequent reason for it will be, no doubt, a
direct disinclination to meeting this person. But in such a case
analysis might show that the disturbing purpose did not relate
to him but was directed against the place at which the meeting
was planned to happen and was avoided on account of a dis­
tressing memory attaching to it. Or, again, if someone forgets
to post a letter, the counter-purpose may be based on the con­
tents of the letter; but it is by no means out of the question that
the letter may be harmless in itself and may only be subject to
the counter-purpose because something about it recalls another
letter which had been written on some earlier occasion and
which offered the counter-will a direct point of attack. It can be
said, therefore, that here the counter-will was transferred from
the earlier letter, which justified it, to the present one, which it
had in fact no grounds for concern about. You see, then, that
we must practise restraint and foresight in applying our inter­
pretations, justified as they are: things that are psychologically
equivalent may in practice have a great variety of meanings.
Phenomena such as these last may seem to you most unusual,
and you will perhaps be inclined to suppose that an ‘indirect’
counter-will already indicates that the process is a pathological
one. But I can assure you that it occurs as well within the limits
of what is normal and healthy. Moreover you should not mis­
understand me. I am far from admitting that our analytic inter­
pretations are untrustworthy. The ambiguities in the forgetting
of intentions which I have been mentioning exist only so long
as we have not made an analysis of the case and are only making
our interpretations on the basis of our general assumptions. If
we carry out an analysis upon the person in question, we in­
variably learn with sufficient certainty whether the counter-will
is a direct one or what other origin it may have.
The second point I have in mind [cf. p. 72] is this. If in a
large majority of instances we find confirmation of the fact that

74

PARAPRAXES

the forgetting of an intention goes back to a counter-will, we
grow bold enough to extend the solution to another set of
instances in which the person under analysis does not confirm
but denies the counter-will we have inferred. Take as examples
of this such extremely common events as forgetting to return
books one has been lent or to pay bills or debts. We shall
venture to insist to the person concerned that an intention
exists in him to keep the books and not to pay the debts, while
he will deny this intention but will not be able to produce any
other explanation of his behaviour. Thereupon we shall go on
to say that he has this intention but knows nothing about it, but
that it is enough for us that it reveals its presence by producing
the forgetting in him. He may repeat to us that he has in fact
forgotten. You will now recognize the situation as one in which
we found ourselves once before [p. 64]. If we want to pursue
our interpretations of parapraxes, which have so frequently
proved justified, to a consistent conclusion, we are forced to the
inescapable hypothesis that there are purposes in people which
can become operative without their knowing about them. But
this brings us into opposition to all the views that dominate
both ordinary life and psychology.
The forgetting of proper names and foreign names, as well as
of foreign words, can similarly be traced back to a counter­
intention, which is aimed either directly or indirectly against
the name concerned. I have already given you several instances
of direct dislike [p. 52]. But indirect causation is particularly
frequent in these cases and can usually only be established by
careful analyses. For instance, during the present war, which
has obliged us to give up so many of our former enjoyments, our
power of remembering proper names has suffered greatly as the
result of the strangest associations. A short time ago I found
that I was unable to reproduce the name of the innocent
Moravian town of Bisenz', and analysis showed that what was
responsible for this was not any direct hostility to it but its
resemblance in sound to the name of the Palazzo Bisenzi in
Orvieto which I had repeatedly enjoyed visiting in the past.1
Here for the first time, in this reason for objecting to remember­
ing a name, we come across a principle which will later on
reveal its enormous importance for the causation of neurotic
1 [This example was added in 1917 to P.E.L., 34.]

IV. PARAPRAXES (3)

75

symptoms: the memory’s disinclination to remembering any­
thing which is connected with feelings of unpleasure and the
reproduction of which would renew the unpleasure. This in­
tention to avoid unpleasure arising from a recollection or from
other psychical acts, this psychical flight from unpleasure, may
be recognized as the ultimate operative motive not only for the
forgetting of names but for many other parapraxes, such as
omissions, errors, and so on.
The forgetting of names, however, seems particularly facili­
tated psycho-physiologically, and for that reason cases occur
in which interference by the unpleasure motive cannot be
confirmed. If someone has a tendency to forget names, analytic
investigation will show that names escape him not only because
he does not like them themselves or because they remind him of
something disagreeable, but also because in his case the same
name belongs to another circle of associations with which he
is more intimately related. The name is, as it were, anchored
there and is kept from contact with the other associations which
have been momentarily activated. If you recall the tricks of
mnemotechnics,1 you will realize with some surprise that the
same chains of association which are deliberately laid down in
order to prevent names from being forgotten can also lead to our
forgetting them. The most striking example of this is afforded
by the proper names of persons, which naturally possess quite
different psychical importance for different people. Let us, for
instance, take a first name such as Theodore. To one of you
it will have no special meaning, to another it will be the name
of his father or brother or of a friend, or his own name. Analytic
experience will then show you that the first of these people is in
no danger of forgetting that a particular stranger bears this
name, whereas the others will be constantly inclined to withhold
from strangers a name which seems to them reserved for
intimate connections. If you now bear in mind that this associa­
tive inhibition may coincide with the operation of the
unpleasure principle1
2 and, besides that, with an indirect
1 [Artificial methods of improving the memory—e.g. ‘Pelmanism’.]
2 [Since the time of The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a) where the
principle is so named (e.g. Standard Ed., 5, 600) Freud had almost
invariably spoken of the ‘pleasure principle’. It is discussed under this
latter name in Lecture XXII, p. 356 f. below.]

s.F. xv—F

76

PARAPRAXES

mechanism, you will be in a position to form an adequate idea
of the complications in the causation of the temporary forget­
ting of a name. An appropriate analysis will however unravel
every one of these tangles for you.
The forgetting of impressions and experiences demonstrates much
more clearly and exclusively than the forgetting of names
the operation of the purpose of keeping disagreeable things out
of memory. The whole field of this kind of forgetting does not,
of course, fall within the class of parapraxes, but only such cases
as, measured by the standard of our usual experience, seem to
us striking and unjustified: for instance, when the forgetting
affects impressions that are too fresh or important, or when the
missing memory tears a gap in what is otherwise a wellremembered chain of events. Why and in what way we are
able to forget in general, and among other things experiences
which have certainly left the deepest impression upon us, such
as the events of our earliest childhood years,—that is quite
another problem, in which fending off unpleasurable impulses
plays a certain part but is far from being the whole explana­
tion.1 It is an undoubted fact that disagreeable impressions are
easily forgotten. Various psychologists have noticed it and the
great Darwin was so much impressed by it that he made it ‘a
golden rule’ to note down with especial care any observations
which seemed unfavourable to his theory, since he had con­
vinced himself that precisely they would not remain in his
memory.2
A person who hears for the first time of this principle of the
fending off of unpleasurable memories by forgetting rarely fails
to object that on the contrary it has been his experience that
distressing things are particularly hard to forget but keep on
returning to torment him against his will—memories, for
instance, of insults and humiliations. This is also a true fact,
but the objection is not to the point. It is important to begin in
good time to reckon with the fact that mental life is the arena
and battle-ground for mutually opposing purposes or, to put
1 [Infantile amnesia is discussed in Lecture XIII, p. 199 f. below. For a
discussion of forgetting in general, see a long footnote added to P.E.L.,
274, in 1907.]
1 [The whole passage from Darwin’s autobiography (1958, 123) is
quoted P.E.L., 148.]

IV. PARAPRAXES (3)

77

it non-dynamically, that it consists of contradictions and pairs
of contraries. Proof of the existence of a particular purpose is no
argument against the existence of an opposite one; there is
room for both. It is only a question of the attitude of these
contraries to each other, and of what effects are produced by
the one and by the other.

Losing and mislaying are of particular interest to us owing
to the many meanings they may have—owing, that is, to the
multiplicity of the purposes which can be served by these para­
praxes. All cases have in common the fact that there was a
wish to lose something; they differ in the basis and aim of that
wish. We lose a thing when it is worn out, when we intend to
replace it by a better one, when we no longer like it, when it
originates from someone with whom we are no longer on good
terms or when we acquired it in circumstances we no longer
want to recall. [Gf. p. 54.] Dropping, damaging or breaking
the object can serve the same purpose. In the sphere of social
life experience is said to have shown that unwanted and
illegitimate children are far more frail than those legitimately
conceived. The crude technique of baby-farmers1 is not neces­
sary for bringing about this result; a certain amount of neglect
in looking after the children should be quite sufficient. The
preserving of things may be subject to the same influences as
that of children.
Things may, however, be condemned to be lost without their
value having suffered any diminution—when, that is, there
is an intention to sacrifice something to Fate in order to ward
off some other dreaded loss. Analysis tells us that it is still quite
a common thing among us to exorcize Fate in this way; and
thus our losing is often a voluntary sacrifice. In the same way,
losing may also serve the purpose of defiance or self-punish­
ment. In short, the more remote reasons for the intention to get
rid of a thing by losing it are beyond number.
Bungled actions, like other errors, are often used to fulfil
wishes which one ought to deny oneself. Here the intention
disguises itself as a lucky accident. For instance, as happened to
one of my friends, a man may be due, obviously against his will,
1 [In the original literally: ‘what are known as angel-makers’.]

78

PARAPRAXES

to go by train to visit someone near the town where he lives,
and then, at a junction where he has to change, may by mistake
get into a train that takes him back to where he came from.
Or someone on a journey may be anxious to make a stop at an
intermediate station but may be forbidden from doing so by
other obligations, and he may then overlook or miss some con­
nection so that he is after all obliged to break his journey in the
way he wished. Or what happened to one of my patients: I had
forbidden him to telephone to the girl he was in love with, and
then, when he meant to telephone to me, he asked for the wrong
number ‘by mistake’ or ‘while he was thinking of something
else’ and suddenly found himself connected to the girl’s number.1
A good example of an outright blunder, and one of practical
importance, is provided by an observation made by an engineer
in his account of what preceded a case of material damage:
‘Some time ago 1 worked with several students in the labora­
tory of the technical college on a series of complicated experi­
ments in elasticity, a piece of work which we had undertaken
voluntarily but which was beginning to take up more time than
we had expected. One day as I returned to the laboratory with
my friend F., he remarked how annoying it was to him to lose
so much time on that particular day as he had so much else
to do at home. I could not help agreeing with him and added
half jokingly, referring to an incident the week before: “Let
us hope that the machine will go wrong again so that we can
stop work and go home early.”
‘In arranging the work it happened that F. was given the
regulation of the valve of the press; that is to say, he was, by
cautiously opening the valve, to let the fluid under pressure
flow slowly out of the accumulator into the cylinder of the
hydraulic press. The man conducting the experiment stood by
the manometer and when the right pressure was reached called
out a loud “Stop!” At the word of command F. seized the
valve and turned it with all his might—to the left! (All valves
without exception are closed by being turned to the right.)
This caused the full pressure of the accumulator to come sud­
denly on to the press, a strain for which the connecting-pipes
are not designed, so that one of them immediately burst—quite
1 [These last three examples are described much more fully P.E.L.,
222 and 226-8.]

IV. PARAPRAXES (3)

79

a harmless accident to the machine, but enough to oblige us
to suspend work for the day and go home.
‘It is characteristic, by the way, that when we were discussing
the affair some time later my friend F. had no recollection
whatever of my remark, which I recalled with certainty.’1
This may lead you to suspect that it is not always just an
innocent chance that turns the hands of your domestic servants
into dangerous enemies of your household belongings. And you
may also raise the question whether it is always a matter of
chance when people injure themselves and risk their own safety.
These are notions whose value you may care to test, if occasion
arises, by analysing observations of your own.
This, Ladies and Gentlemen, is far from being all that might
be said about parapraxes. Much remains that might be
examined and discussed. But I am satisfied if our discussion
of the subject so far has to some extent shaken your previous
views and has made you a little prepared to accept new ones.
I am content, for the rest, to leave you faced with an unclarified
situation. We cannot establish all our doctrines from a study of
parapraxes and we are not obliged to draw our evidence from
that material alone. The great value of parapraxes for our
purposes lies in their being very common phenomena which,
moreover, can easily be observed in oneself, and which can
occur without the slightest implication of illness. There is only
one of your unanswered questions which I should like to put
into words before I end. If, as we have found from many
instances, people come so close to an understanding of para­
praxes and so often behave as though they grasped their sense,
how is it possible that they none the less set down these same
phenomena as being in general chance events without sense or
meaning, and that they can oppose the psycho-analytic elucida­
tion of them with so much vigour?
You are right. This is a remarkable fact and it calls for an
explanation. But I will not give you one. Instead, I will
introduce you by degrees to fields of knowledge from which
the explanation will force itself upon you without any con­
tribution of mine.
1 [Reproduced from P.E.L., 174.]

PART II

DREAMS

(1916 [1915-16])

LECTURE V

DIFFICULTIES AND FIRST
APPROACHES
Ladies and Gentlemen,—It was discovered one day that the
pathological symptoms of certain neurotic patients have a
sense.1 On this discovery the psycho-analytic method of treat­
ment was founded. It happened in the course of this treatment
that patients, instead of bringing forward their symptoms,
brought forward dreams. A suspicion thus arose that the dreams
too had a sense.12
We will not, however, follow this historical path, but will
proceed in the opposite direction. We will demonstrate the
sense of dreams by way of preparing for the study of the neu­
roses. This reversal is justified, since the study of dreams is not
only the best preparation for the study of the neuroses, but
dreams are themselves a neurotic symptom, which, moreover,
offers us the priceless advantage of occurring in all healthy
people.3*
8Indeed, supposing all human beings were healthy, so
long as they dreamt we could arrive from their dreams at almost
all the discoveries which the investigation of the neuroses has
led to.
Dreams, then, have become a subject of psycho-analytic
1 By Josef Breuer in the years 1880-2. Cf. the lectures delivered by me
in America in 1909 (Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis [1910a]) and ‘On the
History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’ [1914J].
2 [Freud’s major work on the subject of dreams was, of course, The
Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), Standard Ed., 4 and 5. There is, however,
scarcely one of his writings in which the topic did not emerge, but a list
of the principal discussions of it is given in an Appendix to that work
(ibid., 5, 626). A considerable number of references to it will be found
in editorial footnotes to the present set of lectures; and, to save space,
the abbreviation ‘I. of D.’ will be used, with application in every case to
Volumes IV and V of the Standard Edition. It may be noted that the
pagination of the text of the latest separate editions of the work (London:
Allen and Unwin, 1955 and New York: Basic Books, 1955) is identical
with that of the Standard Edition volumes.]
8 [Freud discussed this further towards the end of the last lecture of
the series (p. 456 f., below).]
83

84

DREAMS

research: once again ordinary phenomena, with little value set
on them, and apparently of no practical use—like parapraxes,
with which indeed they have in common the fact of occurring
in healthy people. But apart from this the conditions for our
work are a good deal less favourable here. Parapraxes had
merely been neglected by science, little attention had been paid
to them; but at least there was no harm in concerning oneself
with them. ‘No doubt’, people would say, ‘there are more
important things. But something may possibly come of it.’ But
to concern oneself with dreams is not merely unpractical and
uncalled-for, it is positively disgraceful. It brings with it the
odium of being unscientific and rouses the suspicion of a per­
sonal inclination to mysticism. Imagine a medical man going
in for dreams when there are so many more serious things even
in neuropathology and psychiatry—tumours as big as apples
compressing the organ of the mind, haemorrhages, chronic
inflammation, in all of which the changes in the tissues can be
demonstrated under the microscope! No, dreams are much too
trivial, and unworthy to be an object of research.
And there is something else which from its very nature frus­
trates the requirements of exact research. In investigating
dreams one is not even certain about the object of one’s re­
search. A delusion, for instance, meets one squarely and with
definite outlines. ‘I am the Emperor of China’, says the patient
straight out. But dreams? As a rule no account at all can be
given of them. If anyone gives an account of a dream, has he
any guarantee that his account has been correct, or that he may
not, on the contrary, have altered his account in the course of
giving it and have been obliged to invent some addition to it
to make up for the indistinctness of his recollection? Most
dreams cannot be remembered at all and are forgotten except
for small fragments. And is the interpretation of material of
this kind to serve as the basis of a scientific psychology or as a
method for treating patients?
An excess of criticism may make us suspicious. These objec­
tions to dreams as an object of research are obviously carried
too far. We have already dealt with the question of unimpor­
tance in connection with parapraxes [p. 26 f.]. We have told
ourselves that big things can show themselves by small indica­
tions. As regards their indistinctness—that is one of the charac-

V. DIFFICULTIES AND FIRST APPROACHES

85

teristics of dreams, like any other: we cannot lay down for
things what their characteristics are to be. And incidentally
there are clear and distinct dreams as well. There are, more­
over, other objects of psychiatric research which suffer from the
same characteristic of indistinctness—in many instances, for
example, obsessions, and these have been dealt with, after all,
by respected and esteemed psychiatrists.1 I recall the last such
case that I came across in my medical practice. This was a
woman patient who introduced herself with these words: ‘I
have a sort of feeling as though I had injured or had wanted to
injure some living creature—a child?—no, more like a dog—as
though I may have thrown it off a bridge, or something else.’
We can help to overcome the defect of the uncertainty in
remembering dreams if we decide that whatever the dreamer
tells us must count as his dream, without regard to what he may
have forgotten or have altered in recalling it. And finally it
cannot even be maintained so sweepingly that dreams are
unimportant things. We know from our own experience that
the mood in which one wakes up from a dream may last for
the whole day; doctors have observed cases in which a mental
disease has started with a dream and in which a delusion
originating in the dream has persisted; historical figures are
reported to have embarked on momentous enterprises in re­
sponse to dreams. We may therefore ask what may be the true
source of the contempt in which dreams are held in scientific
circles.
It is, I believe, a reaction against the overvaluation of dreams
in earlier days. The reconstruction of the past is, as we know,
no easy matter, but we may assume with certainty, if I may put
it as a joke, that our ancestors three thousand or more years ago
already had dreams like ours. So far as we know, all the peoples
of antiquity attached great significance to dreams and thought
they could be used for practical purposes. They deduced signs
for the future from them and searched in them for auguries. For
the Greeks and other oriental nations, there may have been
times when a campaign without dream-interpreters seemed as
1 [The tendency of obsessional neurotics to uncertainty and vague­
ness had been discussed by Freud in Section B of Part II of his ‘Notes
upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis’ (1909J). See also the account of
that form of illness in Lecture XVII, p. 258 ff. below.]

86

DREAMS

impossible as one without air-reconnaissance seems to-day.
When Alexander the Great started on his conquests, his train
included the most famous dream-interpreters. The city of
Tyre, which at that time still stood on an island, offered the
king such a stiff resistance that he considered the possibility of
raising the siege. Then one night he had a dream of a satyr who
seemed to be dancing in triumph, and when he reported it to
his dream-interpreters they informed him that it foretold his
conquest of the city. He ordered an assault and captured Tyre.1
Among the Etruscans and Romans other methods of foretelling
the future were in use; but throughout the whole of the Hellenistic-Roman period the interpretation of dreams was prac­
tised and highly esteemed. Of the literature dealing with the
subject the principal work at least has survived: the book by
Artemidorus of Daldis, who probably lived during the reign of
the Emperor Hadrian.1
2 How it came about after this that the
art of interpreting dreams declined and that dreams fell into
discredit I cannot tell you. The spread of enlightenment cannot
have had much to do with it, for many things more absurd than
the dream-interpretation of antiquity were faithfully preserved
in the obscurity of the Middle Ages. The fact remains that
interest in dreams gradually sank to the level of superstition and
could survive only among the uneducated classes. The final
abuse of dream-interpretation was reached in our days with
attempts to discover from dreams the numbers fated to be
drawn in the game of lotto.® On the other hand the exact
science of to-day has repeatedly concerned itself with dreams
but always with the sole aim of applying its physiological
theories to them. Medical men, of course, looked on dreams as
non-psychical acts, as the expression in mental life of somatic
stimuli. Binz (1878, [35]) pronounced that dreams are ‘somatic
processes, which are in every case useless and in many cases
positively pathological, to which the soul of the universe and
immortality are as sublimely superior as the blue sky above
some weed-grown, low-lying stretch of sand.’ Maury [1878,
50] compares dreams to the disordered twitchings of St. Vitus’s
1 [The explanation of this dream is given in Lecture XV, p. 236
below.]
2 [Some account of this work appears in I. of D., 4, 3 and 98 n.]
8 [Something very similar to what is now known as ‘Bingo’.]

V. DIFFICULTIES AND FIRST APPROACHES

87

dance as contrasted with the co-ordinated movements of a
healthy man. According to an old analogy, the contents
of a dream are like the sounds produced when ‘the ten fingers
of a man who knows nothing of music wander over the keys of
a piano’ [Strumpell, 1877, 84].
Interpreting means finding a hidden sense in something;
there can of course be no question of doing that if we adopt this
last estimate of the function of dreams. Look at the description
of dreams given by Wundt [1874], Jodi [1896], and other more
recent philosophers. They content themselves with enumerating
the respects in which dream-life differs from waking thought,
always in a sense depreciatory to dreams—emphasizing the fact
that associations are broken apart, that the critical faculty
ceases to work, that all knowledge is eliminated, as well as
other signs of diminished functioning. The only valuable con­
tribution to the knowledge of dreams for which we have to
thank exact science relates to the effect produced on the con­
tent of dreams by the impact of somatic stimuli during sleep.
A recently deceased Norwegian author, J. Mourly Void, pub­
lished two stout volumes of experimental researches into dreams
(German translation, 1910 and 1912), which are devoted almost
exclusively to the consequences of alterations in the posture of
the limbs. They have been recommended to us as models of
exact research into dreams. Can you imagine what exact
science would say if it learnt that we want to make an attempt
to discover the sense of dreams? Perhaps it has already said it.
But we will not let ourselves be frightened off. If it was possible
for parapraxes to have a sense, dreams can have one too; and
in a great many cases parapraxes have a sense, which has escaped
exact science. So let us embrace the prejudice of the ancients
and of the people and let us follow in the footsteps of the
dream-interpreters of antiquity.

We must begin by finding our bearings in the task before us
and taking a general survey of the field of dreams. What, then,
is a dream? It is hard to answer in a single sentence. But we
will not attempt a definition when it is enough to point to
something familiar to everyone.1 We should, however, bring
the essential feature of dreams into prominence. Where is that
1 [Cf., however, some remarks on this in Lecture XIV, p. 233 below.]

88

DREAMS

to be found, though? There are such immense differences within
the frame that comprises our subject—differences in every
direction. The essential feature will presumably be something
that we can point to as common to all dreams.
The first thing common to all dreams would seem to be, of
course, that we are asleep during them. Dreaming is evidently
mental life during sleep—something which has certain resem­
blances to waking mental life but which, on the other hand, is
distinguished from it by large differences. This was, long ago,
Aristotle’s definition.1 It may be that there are still closer
connections between dreams and sleep. We can be woken by a
dream; we very often have a dream when we wake up spon­
taneously or if we are forcibly aroused from sleep. Thus dreams
seem to be an intermediate state between sleeping and waking.
So our attention is turned to sleep. Well, then, what is sleep?
That is a physiological or biological problem about which
much is still in dispute. On that we can come to no conclusion;
but we ought, I think, to try to describe the psychological
characteristics of sleep. Sleep is a state in which I want to know
nothing of the external world, in which I have taken my interest
away from it. I put myself to sleep by withdrawing from the
external world and keeping its stimuli away from me. I also go
to sleep when I am fatigued by it. So when I go to sleep I say
to the external world: ‘Leave me in peace: I want to go to
sleep.’ On the contrary, children say: ‘I’m not going to sleep
yet; I’m not tired, and I want to have some more experi­
ences.’ The biological purpose of sleep seems therefore to be
rehabilitation, and its psychological characteristic suspense of
interest in the world. Our relation to the world, into which
we have come so unwillingly, seems to involve our not being
able to tolerate it uninterruptedly. Thus from time to time we
withdraw into the premundane state, into existence in the
womb. At any rate, we arrange conditions for ourselves very
like what they were then: warm, dark and free from stimuli.
Some of us roll ourselves up into a tight package and, so as to
sleep, take up a posture much as it was in the womb. The world,
it seems, does not possess even those of us who are adults com­
pletely, but only up to two thirds; one third of us is still quite
unborn. Every time we wake in the morning it is like a new
1 [Cf. I. ofD., 4, 2-3.]

V. DIFFICULTIES AND FIRST APPROACHES

89

birth. Indeed, in speaking of our state after sleep, we say that
we feel as though we were newly born. (In saying this, inciden­
tally, we are making what is probably a very false assumption
about the general sensations of a new-born child, who seems
likely, on the contrary, to be feeling very uncomfortable.) We
speak, too, of being born as ‘first seeing the fight of day’.1
If this is what sleep is, dreams cannot possibly form part of
its programme, but seem on the contrary to be an unwelcome
addition to it. In our opinion too, a dreamless sleep is the best,
the only proper one. There ought to be no mental activity in
sleep; if it begins to stir, we have not succeeded in establishing
the foetal state of rest: we have not been able entirely to avoid
residues of mental activity. Dreaming would consist in these
residues. But if so, it would really seem that there is no need for
dreams to have any sense. It was different with parapraxes;
they, after all, were activities during waking life. But if I am
asleep and have stopped mental activity completely and have
merely failed to suppress some residues of it, then there is no
need whatever for these residues to have any sense. I cannot
even make use of any such sense, since the rest of my mental life
is asleep. So it really can only be a matter of reactions, in the
nature of Switchings’, of mental phenomena such as result
directly from a somatic stimulus. Dreams would accordingly be
residues of waking mental activity which were disturbing
sleep, and we might well decide to drop the subject at once, as
not being suited to psycho-analysis.
Even if dreams are superfluous, however, they do exist, and
we can try to account for their existence. Why does mental life
fail to go to sleep? Probably because there is something that
will not allow the mind any peace. Stimuli impinge upon it
and it must react to them. A dream, then, is the manner in
which the mind reacts to stimuli that impinge upon it in the
state of sleep. And here we see a way of access to an understand­
ing of dreams. We can take various dreams and try to discover
what the stimulus was which was seeking to disturb sleep and
to which the reaction was a dream. Our examination of the
first thing common to all dreams seems to have taken us so far.

Is there anything else common to them? Yes, something
1 [In German, literally, ‘seeing the light of the world’.]

90

DREAMS

unmistakable but much harder to grasp and to describe. Mental
processes in sleep have a quite different character from those of
waking life. We experience every sort of thing in dreams and
believe in it, whereas nevertheless we experience nothing,
except, perhaps, the single disturbing stimulus. We experience
it predominantly in visual images; feelings may be present too,
and thoughts interwoven in it as well; the other senses may also
experience something, but nonetheless it is predominantly a
question of images. Part of the difficulty of giving an account of
dreams is due to our having to translate these images into words.
‘I could draw it’, a dreamer often says to us, ‘but I don’t know
how to say it.’ This is not, however, a reduced mental activity,
like that of a feeble-minded person as compared to that of a
genius: it is qualitatively different, though it is hard to say where
the difference lies. G. T. Fechner once voiced a suspicion that
the scene of action of dreams (in the mind) is different from
that of waking ideational life.1 Though we do not understand
this and do not know what we are to make of it, it does in fact
reproduce the impression of strangeness which most dreams
make on us. The comparison between dream-activity and the
effects of an unmusical hand on the piano [p. 87] does not
help us here. The piano will after all respond with the same
sounds, though not with tunes, to any chance pressure on its
keys. Let us carefully bear this second thing common to all
dreams in mind, even though we may not have understood it.

Are there any other things common to them? I cannot
discover any; I can see nothing anywhere but differences, and
differences in all kinds of ways: in their apparent duration, as
well as in their clarity, in the amount of affect accompanying
them, in the possibility of retaining them, and so on. This
variety is not in fact what we might expect to find in a mere
defensive reaction to a stimulus, something mechanically im­
posed, an empty thing, like the twitchings of St. Vitus’s dance.
As regards the dimensions of dreams, some are very short and
comprise only a single image or a few, a single thought, or
even a • single word; others are uncommonly rich in their
1 [The psycho-physiologist Fechner (1801-87) had a great influence
on Freud’s theories (see his Autobiographical Study (1925rf), Standard Ed.,
20, 59). The present remark is discussed in I. ofD., 4, 48 and 5, 535-6.

V. DIFFICULTIES AND FIRST APPROACHES

91

content, present whole novels and seem to last a long time.
There are dreams which are as clear as [waking] experience, so
clear that quite a time after waking we do not realize that they
were dreams; and there are others which are indescribably dim,
shadowy and blurred. Indeed in one and the same dream
excessively definite portions may alternate with others of
scarcely discernible vagueness. Dreams may be entirely sensible
or at least coherent, witty even, or fantastically beautiful;
others, again, are confused, feeble-minded as it were, absurd,
often positively crazy. There are dreams that leave us quite cold
and others in which affects of all kinds are manifest—pain to the
point of tears, anxiety to the point of waking us up, astonish­
ment, delight, and so on. Dreams are usually quickly forgotten
after waking, or they may last through the day, remembered
more and more dimly and incompletely till evening; others,
again—for instance, childhood dreams—are so well preserved
that after thirty years they remain in the memory like some fresh
experience. Dreams may appear, like individuals, on a single
occasion only and never again, or they may recur in the same
person unchanged or with small divergences. In short, this
fragment of mental activity during the night has an immense
repertory at its disposal; it is capable, in fact, of all that the
mind creates in daytime—yet it is never the same thing.
We might try to account for these many variations in dreams
by supposing that they correspond to different intermediate
stages between sleeping and waking, different degrees of in­
complete sleep. Yes, but if this were so, the value, content and
clarity of a dream’s product—and the awareness, too, of its
being a dream—would have to increase in dreams in which the
mind was coming near to waking; and it would not be possible
for a clear and rational fragment of dream to be immediately
followed by one that was senseless and obscure and for this in
turn to be followed by another good piece. The mind could
certainly not alter the depth of its sleep so quickly as that. So
this explanation is of no help: there can be no short cut out of
the difficulty.

We will for the moment leave on one side the ‘sense’ of
dreams, and try to make our way to a better understanding of
them from what we have found is common to them. We inferred
s.f. xv—G

92

DREAMS

from the relation of dreams to the state of sleep that dreams are
the reaction to a stimulus which disturbs sleep. We have learnt
that this too is the single point on which exact experimental
psychology is able to come to our assistance: it brings us evi­
dence that stimuli which impinge during sleep make their
appearance in dreams. Many investigations of this kind have
been made, most recently those by Mourly Void which I have
already mentioned [p. 87]; and each of us, no doubt, has been
in a position to confirm this finding from personal observation.
I will select a few of the earlier experiments. Maury [1878] had
some experiments performed on himself. He was given some
eau-de-cologne to smell in his sleep. He dreamt he was in
Cairo, in Johann Maria Farina’s shop, and some further absurd
adventures followed. Or, he was pinched lightly on the neck;
he dreamt of a mustard plaster being applied to him and of a
doctor who had treated him as a child. Or again, a drop of
water was dropped on his forehead; he was in Italy, was sweat­
ing violently and was drinking white Orvieto wine.1
The striking thing about these experimentally produced
dreams will perhaps be even more plainly visible in another
series of stimulus-dreams. They are three dreams reported by
an intelligent observer, Hildebrandt [1875], all of them reac­
tions to the ringing of an alarm-clock:
‘I dreamt, then, that one spring morning I was going for a
walk and was strolling through the green fields till I came to a
neighbouring village, where I saw the villagers in their best
clothes, with hymn-books under their arms, flocking to the
church. Of course! It was Sunday, and early morning service
would soon be beginning. I decided I would attend it; but
first, as I was rather hot from walking, I went into the church­
yard which surrounded the church, to cool down. While I was
reading some of the tombstones, I heard the bell-ringer climb­
ing up the church tower and at the top of it I now saw the little
village bell which would presently give the signal for the begin­
ning of devotions. For quite a while it hung there motionless,
then it began to swing, and suddenly its peal began to ring out
clear and piercing—so clear and piercing that it put an end to
my sleep. But what was ringing was the alarm-clock.
1 [For these and several other of Maury’s experiments see I. of D., 4,
25.J

'

V. DIFFICULTIES AND FIRST APPROACHES

93

‘Here is another instance. It was a bright winter’s day and
the streets were covered with deep snow. I had agreed to join
a party for a sleigh-ride; but I had to wait a long time before
news came that the sleigh was at the door. Now followed the
preparations for getting in—the fur rug spread out, the foot­
muff put ready—and at last I was sitting in my seat. But even
then the moment of departure was delayed till a pull at the
reins gave the waiting horses the signal. Then off they started,
and, with a violent shake, the sleigh bells broke into their
familiar jingle—with such violence, in fact, that in a moment
the cobweb of my dream was torn through. And once again it
was only the shrill sound of the alarm-clock.
‘And now yet a third example. I saw a kitchenmaid, carrying
several dozen plates piled on one another, walking along the
passage to the dining-room. The column of china in her arms
seemed to me in danger of losing its balance. “Take care,” I
exclaimed, “or you’ll drop the whole load.” The inevitable
rejoinder duly followed: she was quite accustomed to that kind
ofjob, and so on. And meanwhile my anxious looks followed the
advancing figure. Then—just as I expected—she stumbled at
the threshold and the fragile crockery slipped and rattled and
clattered in a hundred pieces on the floor. But the noise con­
tinued without ceasing, and soon it seemed no longer to be a
clattering; it was turning into a ringing—and the ringing, as
my waking self now became aware, was only the alarm-clock
doing its duty.’1
These are very nice dreams, entirely sensible and by no
means as incoherent as dreams are usually apt to be. I am not
objecting to them on that account. What they have in common
is that in each case the situation ends in a noise, which, when
the dreamer wakes up, is recognized as being made by the
alarm-clock. So we see here how a dream is produced; but we
learn something more than this. The dream does not recognize
the alarm-clock—nor does it appear in the dream—but it
replaces the noise of the alarm-clock by another; it interprets
the stimulus which is bringing sleep to an end, but it interprets
it differently each time. Why does it do that? There is no answer
to this; it seems a matter of caprice. Understanding the dream
would mean being able to say why this particular noise and
1 [Also quoted in I. ofD., 4, 27-8.]

94

DREAMS

none other was chosen for the interpretation of the stimulus
from the alarm-clock. We may make an analogous objection to
Maury’s experiments: we can see quite clearly that the imping­
ing stimulus appears in the dream; but why it should take this
particular form we are not told, and it does not seem by any
means to follow from the nature of the stimulus that disturbed
sleep. In Maury’s experiments, too, a quantity of other dream­
material usually appears in addition to the direct effect of the
stimulus—for instance, the ‘absurd adventures’ in the eau-decologne dream—, which cannot be accounted for.
And now consider that arousal dreams offer the best chance
of establishing the influence of external sleep-disturbing stimuli.
In most other cases it will become more difficult. We do not
wake out of every dream, and if we remember a dream of the
past night in the morning, how are we to discover a disturbing
stimulus which may perhaps have made its impact on us during
the night? I once succeeded in identifying a sound-stimulus of
that kind retrospectively, but only, of course, owing to special
circumstances. I woke up one morning in a mountain resort
in the Tyrol, knowing I had had a dream that the Pope was
dead. I could not explain the dream to myself; but later on my
wife asked me if I had heard the fearful noise made by the
pealing of bells towards morning which had broken out from all
the churches and chapels. No, I had heard nothing, my sleep is
more resistant than hers; but thanks to her information I
understood my dream.1 How often may stimuli of this kind
instigate dreams in a sleeper without his getting news of them
afterwards? Perhaps very often, but perhaps not. If the stimulus
can no longer be pointed to, we cannot be convinced of its
existence. And in any case we have changed our view of the
importance of external stimuli that disturb sleep since we learnt
that they can explain only a small portion of the dream and not
the whole dream-reaction.
There is no need to give up this theory entirely on that
account. Moreover it is capable of extension. It is obviously a
matter of indifference what it is that disturbs sleep or instigates
the mind to dream. If it cannot invariably be a sensory stimulus
coming from outside, there may instead be what is called a
somatic stimulus, arising from the internal organs. This is a
1 [Told at greater length, I. of D., 4, 232.]

V. DIFFICULTIES AND FIRST APPROACHES

95

very plausible notion and agrees with the most popular view of
the origin of dreams: ‘dreams come from indigestion’, people
often say. Here too unluckily we must often suspect that there
are cases when a somatic stimulus which has impinged on a
sleeper during the night is no longer manifest after waking and
can therefore not be proved to have occurred. But we shall not
overlook the number of clear experiences which support the
origin of dreams from somatic stimuli. In general, there can be
no doubt that the condition of the internal organs can influence
dreams. The relation of the content of some dreams to an over­
full bladder or to a state of excitation of the genital organs is too
plain to be mistaken. These clear cases lead to others in which
the content of the dreams give rise to a justifiable suspicion that
there has been an impact from somatic stimuli because there is
something in the content which can be regarded as a workingover, a representation or an interpretation of such stimuli.
Schemer (1861), who made researches into dreams, argued
particularly strongly in favour of this derivation of dreams and
brought forward some good examples of it. For instance, in one
dream he saw ‘two rows of pretty boys with fair hair and
delicate complexions facing one another in pugnacious array,
making an onset and attacking one another, and then drawing
back and taking up their old position again, and then starting
the whole business once more.’ His interpretation of these two
rows of boys as teeth is plausible in itself and seems fully con­
firmed when we learn that after this scene the dreamer ‘pulled
a long tooth out of his jaw.’1 Similarly, the interpretation of
‘long, narrow, winding passages’ as derived from an intestinal
stimulus seems valid, and confirms the assertion by Schemer
that dreams seek above all to represent the organ that sends out
the stimulus by objects resembling it.
Thus we must be prepared to admit that internal stimuli
can play the same part in dreams as external ones. Any estimate
of their importance is unfortunately open to the same objections.
In a large number of cases an interpretation pointing to a
somatic stimulus is uncertain or unprovable. Not all dreams,
but only a certain number of them give rise to a suspicion that
internal organic stimuli had a share in their origin. And lastly,
internal somatic stimuli are as little able as external sensory
1 [7. ofD., 4, 227.]

96

DREAMS

stimuli to explain more of a dream than what corresponds in it
to a direct reaction to the stimulus. Where the rest of the dream
comes from remains obscure.
Let us notice, however, one peculiarity of dream-life which
comes to light in this study of the effects of stimuli. Dreams do
not simply reproduce the stimulus; they work it over, they
make allusions to it, they include it in some context, they
replace it by something else. This is a side of the dream-work1
which is bound to interest us since it may perhaps bring us
nearer to the essence of dreams. When a person constructs
something as a result of a stimulus, the stimulus need not on
that account exhaust the whole of the work. Shakespeare’s
Macbeth, for instance, was apiece d’occasion composed to celebrate
the accession of the king who first united the crowns of the
three kingdoms. But does this immediate historical occasion
cover the content of the tragedy? Does it explain its greatnesses
and its enigmas? It may be that the external and internal
stimuli, too, impinging on the sleeper, are only the instigators
of the dream and will accordingly betray nothing to us of its
essence.
The second thing that is common to dreams, their psychical
peculiarity [p. 89 f.], is on the one hand hard to grasp and on the
other offers us no starting-point for further enquiry. We exper­
ience things in dreams as a rule in visual forms. Can the stimuli
throw any light on this? Is what we experience in fact the
stimulus? But, if so, why is the experience visual, while it is only
in the rarest cases that optical stimulation has instigated the
dream? Or if we dream spoken words, can it be shown that
during sleep a conversation, or some noise resembling one,
made its way into our ears? I venture to dismiss that possibility
decisively.
If we can get no further with what is common to dreams, let
us see whether their differences can help us. Dreams are, of
course, often senseless, confused and absurd; but there are also
sensible, matter-of-fact, and reasonable ones. Let us enquire
whether the latter, the sensible ones, can throw any light on
the senseless ones. Here is the latest reasonable dream that I
1 [The process which transforms the latent thoughts behind the dream
into its manifest form. This is the subject of Lecture XI below.]

V. DIFFICULTIES AND FIRST APPROACHES

97

have had reported to me. It was dreamt by a young man: ‘I
went for a walk along the Karntnerstrasse1 and met Herr X.
there and joined him for a time. Then I went into a restaurant.
Two ladies and a gentleman came and sat at my table. I was
annoyed at this to begin with and wouldn’t look at them.
Then I did look and found that they were quite nice.’ The
dreamer commented on this that on the evening before the
dream he had in fact walked along the Karntnerstrasse, which
is the way he usually goes, and had met Herr X. there. The
other part of the dream was not a direct recollection, and only
had some similarity to an experience a considerable time ear­
lier. Or here is another matter-of-fact dream, this time a lady’s:
‘Her husband asked her: “Don’t you think we ought to have the
piano tuned?” And she replied: “It’s not worth while; the
hammers need reconditioning in any case.” ’I2 This dream
repeated, without much alteration, a conversation which had
taken place between her and her husband the day before the
dream. What do we learn from these two reasonable dreams?
Nothing except that they contain repetitions from daily life or
things connected with it. That would already be something, if
it could be said of dreams generally. But there is no question of
that; it applies only to a minority, and in most dreams there is
no sign of a connection with the day before,3*
8and no light is
thrown by this on the senseless and absurd dreams. It only
shows that we have come upon a new task. We not only want to
know what a dream says, but, if it speaks clearly, as it does in
these examples of ours, we also want to know why and for
what purpose this familiar material, only recently experienced,
has been repeated in the dream.

I think that, like me, you must be tired of pursuing enquiries
like those we have so far been making. All one’s interest in a
problem is evidently insufficient unless one knows as well of a
path of approach that will lead to its solution. We have not
yet found such a path. Experimental psychology has brought us
nothing but some very valuable information on the significance
of stimuli as instigators to dreaming. We have nothing to expect
1 [The principal shopping street in Vienna.]
» [Z. ofD., 4, 185.]
8 [A qualification of this statement is to follow shortly (p. 106).]

98

DREAMS

from philosophy except that it will once again haughtily point
out to us the intellectual inferiority of the object of our study.
Nor have we any wish to borrow anything from the occult
sciences. History and popular opinion tell us that dreams have
a sense and a meaning: that they look into the future—which
is hard to accept and certainly incapable of proof. So our first
effort leaves us completely at a loss.
Unexpectedly, a hint reaches us from a direction in which we
have not so far looked. Linguistic usage, which is no chance
thing, but the precipitate of old discoveries, though, to be sure,
it must not be employed incautiously—our language, then, is
acquainted with things that bear the strange name of ‘day­
dreams’. Day-dreams are phantasies (products of the imagina­
tion) ; they are very general phenomena, observable, once more,
in healthy as well as in sick people, and are easily accessible to
study in our own mind. The most remarkable thing about
these imaginative structures is that they have been given the
name of ‘day-dreams’, for there is no trace in them of the two
things that are common to dreams [p. 88 ff.]< Their relation to
sleep is already contradicted by their name; and, as regards the
second thing common to dreams, we do not experience or
hallucinate anything in them but imagine something, we know
that we are having a phantasy, we do not see but think. These
day-dreams appear in the prepubertal period, often in the
later part of childhood even; they persist until maturity is
reached and are then either given up or maintained till the
end of life. The content of these phantasies is dominated by a
very transparent motive. They are scenes and events in which
the subject’s egoistic needs of ambition and power or his erotic
wishes find satisfaction. In young men the ambitious phan­
tasies are the most prominent, in women, whose ambition is
directed to success in love, the erotic ones. But in men, too,
erotic needs are often enough present in the background: all
their heroic deeds and successes seem only to aim at courting
the admiration and favour of women. In other respects these
day-dreams are of many different kinds and pass through
changing vicissitudes. They are either, each one of them,
dropped after a short time and replaced by a fresh one, or they
are retained, spun out into long stories and adapted to the
changes in the circumstances of the subject’s life. They go along

V. DIFFICULTIES AND FIRST APPROACHES

99

with the times, so to speak, and receive a ‘date stamp’ which
bears witness to the influence of the new situation. They are the
raw material of poetic production, for the creative writer uses
his day-dreams, with certain remodellings, disguises and omiss­
ions, to construct the situations which he introduces into his
short stories, his novels or his plays. The hero of the day­
dreams is always the subject himself, either directly or by an
obvious identification with someone else.1
It may be that day-dreams bear their name on account of
having the same relation to reality—in order to indicate that
their content is to be looked on as no less unreal than that of
dreams. But perhaps they share this name because of some
psychical characteristic of dreams which is still unknown to us,
one which we are in search of. It is also possible that we are
being quite wrong in trying to make use of this similarity of
name as something significant. Only later will it be possible to
clear this up.
1 [Freud’s chief discussion of phantasies and of their relation to artistic
creation will be found in two of his earlier papers: ‘Creative Writers
and Day-Dreaming’ (1908a) and ‘Hysterical Phantasies and their Rela­
tion to Bisexuality’ (1908a). He returns to the subject below, in the later
part of Lecture XXIII.]

LECTURE VI

THE PREMISSES AND TECHNIQUE
OF INTERPRETATION
Ladies and Gentlemen,—What we need, then, is a new path,
a method which will enable us to make a start in the investiga­
tion of dreams. I will put a suggestion to you which presents
itself. Let us take it as a premiss from this point onwards that
dreams are not somatic but psychical phenomena. You know what that
means, but what justifies our making the assumption? Nothing:
but there is nothing either to prevent our making it. Here is the
position: if dreams are somatic phenomena they are no concern
of ours, they can only interest us on the assumption that they
are mental phenomena. We will therefore work on the assump­
tion that they really are, to see what comes of it. The outcome
of our work will decide whether we are to hold to this assump­
tion and whether we may then go on to treat it in turn as a
proved finding. But what is it actually that we want to arrive
at? What is our work aiming at? We want something that is
sought for in all scientific work—to understand the pheno­
mena, to establish a correlation between them and, in the latter
end, if it is possible, to enlarge our power over them.
We proceed with our work, accordingly, on the supposition
that dreams are psychical phenomena. In that case they are
products and utterances of the dreamer’s, but utterances which
tell us nothing, which we do not understand. Well, what do you
do if I make an unintelligible utterance to you? You question
me, is that not so? Why should we not do the same thing to the
dreamer—question him as to what his dream means'?
As you will remember, we found ourselves in this situation
once before. It was while we were investigating certain para­
praxes—a case of a slip of the tongue. Someone had said
[p. 42]: ‘Then facts came to Vorschwein’ and we thereupon
asked him—no, it was luckily not we but some other people
who had no connection at all with psycho-analysis—these other
people, then, asked him what he meant by this unintelligible
remark. And he replied at once that he had intended to say
100

VI. THE TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION 101

‘these facts were Schweinereien [disgusting]’, but had forced this
intention back in favour of the milder version ‘then facts
came to Vorschein [light]’. I pointed out to you at the time
[p. 48] that this piece of information was the model for
every psycho-analytic investigation, and you will understand
now that psycho-analysis follows the technique of getting
the people under examination so far as possible themselves
to produce the solution of their riddles [p. 49]. Thus, too,
it is the dreamer himself who should tell us what his dream
means.
But, as we know, things are not so simple with dreams. With
parapraxes it worked all right in a number of cases; but then
others came along in which the person who was questioned
would say nothing, and even indignantly rejected the answer
we proposed to him. With dreams cases of the first sort are
entirely lacking; the dreamer always says he knows nothing.
He cannot reject our interpretation as we have none to offer
him. Are we to give up our attempt then? Since he knows
nothing and we know nothing and a third person could know
even less, there seems to be no prospect of finding out. If you
feel inclined, then, give up the attempt! But if you feel other­
wise, you can accompany me further. For I can assure you
that it is quite possible, and highly probable indeed, that
the dreamer does know what his dream means: only he does
not know that he knows it and for that reason thinks he does not
know it.
You will point out to me that I am once more introducing
an assumption, the second already in this short argument, and
that in doing so I am enormously reducing my procedure’s
claim to credibility: ‘Subject to the premiss that dreams are
psychical phenomena, and subject to the further premiss that
there are mental things in a man which he knows without
knowing that he knows them . . .’ and so on. If so, one has only
to consider the internal improbability of each of these two pre­
misses, and one can quietly divert one’s interest from any con­
clusions that may be based on them.
I have not brought you here, Ladies and Gentlemen, to de­
lude you or to conceal things from you. In my prospectus, it is
true, I announced a course of ‘Elementary Lectures to Serve as

102

DREAMS

an Introduction to Psycho-Analysis’,1 but what I had in mind
was nothing in the nature of a presentation in usum Delphini,12
which would give you a smooth account with all the difficulties
carefully concealed, with the gaps filled in and the doubts
glossed over, so that you might believe with an easy mind that
you had learnt something new. No, for the very reason of your
being beginners, I wanted to show you our science as it is, with
its unevennesses and roughnesses, its demands and hesitations.
For I know that it is the same in all sciences and cannot possibly
be otherwise, especially in their beginnings. I know also that
ordinarily instruction is at pains to start out by concealing such
difficulties and incompletenesses from the learner. But that will
not do for psycho-analysis. So I have in fact laid down two pre­
misses, one within the other; and if anyone finds the whole
thing too laborious and too insecure, or if anyone is accustomed
to higher certainties and more elegant deductions, he need go
no further with us. I think, however, that he should leave
psychological problems entirely alone, for it is to be feared that
in this quarter he will find impassable the precise and secure
paths which he is prepared to follow. And, for a science which
has something to offer, there is no necessity to sue for a hearing
and for followers. Its findings are bound to canvass on its behalf
and it can wait until these have compelled attention to it.
But for those who would like to persist in the subject, I can
point out that my two assumptions are not on a par. The first,
that dreams are psychical phenomena, is the premiss which we
seek to prove by the outcome of our work; the second one has
already been proved in another field, and I am merely ven­
turing to bring it over from there to our own problems.
Where, then, in what field, can it be that proof has been
found that there is knowledge of which the person concerned
nevertheless knows nothing, as we are proposing to assume of
dreamers? After all, this would be a strange, surprising fact and
one which would alter our view of mental life and which would
have no need to hide itself: a fact, incidentally, which cancels
itself in its very naming and which nevertheless claims to be
1 [The ‘elementary’ was dropped from the title of the lectures in their
published form. See footnote 2, p. 9.]
2 [‘For the use of the Dauphin’—an edition of the Classics preparedfor
his son by order of Louis XIV: ‘bowdlerized’.]

VI. THE TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION 103

something real—a contradiction in terms. Well, it does not
hide itself. It is not its fault if people know nothing about it or
do not pay enough attention to it. Any more than we are to
blame because judgement is passed on all these psychological
problems by people who have kept at a distance from all the
observations and experiences which are decisive on the matter.
The proof was found in the field of hypnotic phenomena.
When, in 1889, I took part in the extraordinarily impressive
demonstrations by Liebeault and Bernheim at Nancy,1 I wit­
nessed the following experiment among others. If a man was
put into a state of somnambulism, was made to experience all
kinds of things in a hallucinatory manner, and was then woken
up, he appeared at first to know nothing of what had happened
during his hypnotic sleep. Bernheim then asked him straight
out to report what had happened to him under hypnosis. The
man maintained that he could remember nothing. But Bern­
heim held out against this, brought urgent pressure to bear on
him, insisted that he knew it and must remember it. And, lo
and behold! the man grew uncertain, began to reflect, and re­
called in a shadowy way one of the experiences that had been
suggested to him, and then another piece, and the memory be­
came clearer and clearer and more and more complete, and
finally came to light without a break. Since, however, he knew
afterwards what had happened and had learnt nothing about it
from anyone else in the interval, we are justified in concluding
that he had known it earlier as well. It was merely inaccessible
to him; he did not know that he knew it and thought he did
not know it. That is to say, the position was exactly the same as
what we suspected in our dreamer.
I hope you will be surprised that this fact has been established
and will ask me: ‘Why did you omit to bring this proof forward
earlier, in connection with the parapraxes, when we came to the
point of attributing to a man who had made a slip of the tongue
an intention to say things of which he knew nothing and which
he denied? If a person thinks he knows nothing of experiences
the memory of which he nevertheless has within him, it is no
longer so improbable that he knows nothing of other mental
processes within him. This argument would certainly have im­
pressed us, and helped us to understand parapraxes.’ Of course
1 [Freud returns to this on p. 277.]

104

DREAMS

I could have brought it forward then, but I reserved it for
another place, where it was more needed. The parapraxes ex­
plained themselves in part, and in part left us with a suggestion
that, in order to preserve the continuity of the phenomena con­
cerned, it would be wise to assume the existence of mental pro­
cesses of which the subject knows nothing. In the case of dreams
we are compelled to bring in explanations from elsewhere and
moreover I expect that in their case you will find it easier to
accept my carrying over of the explanations from hypnosis. The
state in which a parapraxis occurs is bound to strike you as
being the normal one; it has no similarity with the hypnotic
state. On the other hand there is an obvious kinship between the
hypnotic state and the state of sleep, which is a necessary con­
dition of dreaming. Hypnosis, indeed, is described as an arti­
ficial sleep. We tell the person we are hypnotizing to sleep, and
the suggestions we make are comparable to the dreams of
natural sleep. The psychical situations in the two cases are
really analogous. In natural sleep we withdraw our interest
from the whole external world; and in hypnotic sleep we also
withdraw it from the whole world, but with the single exception
of the person who has hypnotized us and with whom we remain
in rapport. Incidentally, the sleep of a nursing mother, who re­
mains in rapport with her child and can be woken only by him,
is a normal counterpart of hypnotic sleep. So it scarcely seems
a very bold venture to transpose a situation from hypnosis to
natural sleep. The assumption that in a dreamer too a know­
ledge about his dreams is present, though it is inaccessible to
him so that he himself does not believe it, is not something
entirely out of the blue. It should be noticed, moreover, that a
third line of approach to the study of dreams is opened at this
point: from the stimuli which disturb sleep, from day-dreams,
and now in addition from the suggested dreams of the hypnotic
state.

We may now go back to our task with increased confidence
perhaps. It is very probable, then, that the dreamer knows
about his dream; the only question is how to make it possible
for him to discover his knowledge and communicate it to us.
We do not require him to tell us straight away the sense of his
dream, but he will be able to find its origin, the circle of

VI. THE TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION 105

thoughts and interests from which it sprang. You will recall that
in the case of the parapraxis the man was asked how he had
arrived at the wrong word ‘ Vorschwein’ and the first thing that
occurred to him1 gave us the explanation. Our technique with
dreams, then, is a very simple one, copied from this example.
We shall once more ask the dreamer how he arrived at the
dream, and once more his first remark is to be looked on as an
explanation. Thus we disregard the distinction between his
thinking or not thinking that he knows something, and we treat
both cases as one and the same.
This technique is certainly very simple, but I fear it will rouse
your liveliest opposition. You will say: ‘A fresh assumption! the
third! And the most unlikely of all! If I ask the dreamer what
occurs to him in connection with the dream, is precisely the first
thing that occurs to him going to bring the explanation we are
hoping for? But nothing at all may occur to him, or heaven
knows what may occur to him. 1 cannot see what an expectation
of that kind is based on. That is really showing too much trust
in Providence at a point where rather more exercise of the
critical faculty would be appropriate. Besides, a dream is not a
single wrong word; it consists of a number of elements. So
which association are we to take up?’
You are correct on all your minor points. A dream differs
from a slip of the tongue, among other things, in the multi­
plicity of its elements. Our technique must take this into
account. I therefore suggest to you that we should divide the
dream into its elements and start a separate enquiry into each
element; if we do this, the analogy with a slip of the tongue is
re-established. You are also right in thinking that when the
dreamer is questioned about the separate elements of the dream
he may reply that nothing occurs to him. There are some in­
stances in which we let this reply pass, and you will later hear
which these are [cf. p. 149]; strangely enough, they are in­
stances in which definite ideas may occur to us ourselves. But in
general if the dreamer asserts that nothing occurs to him we con­
tradict him; we bring urgent pressure to bear on him, we insist
that something must occur to him—and we turn out to be right.
He will produce an idea—some idea, it is a matter of indiffer­
ence to us which. He will give us certain pieces of information,
1 [See footnote, p. 47 f.]

106

DREAMS

which may be described as ‘historical’, with particular ease.
He may say: ‘That’s something that happened yesterday’ (as
was the case in our two ‘matter-of-fact’ dreams [p. 97]), or:
‘That reminds me of something that happened a short time
ago’—and we shall discover in this way that dreams are con­
nected with impressions of the last day or two much more often
than we thought to begin with [loc. cit.]. And finally he will also
recall, starting from the dream, events from further back and
even perhaps from the far distant past.
But on your main point you are wrong. If you think it is
arbitrary to assume that the first thing that occurs to the
dreamer is bound to bring what we are looking for or to lead us
to it, if you think that what occurs to him might be anything
in the world and might have no connection with what we are
looking for, and that it is only exhibiting my trust in Providence
if I expect something different—then you are making a great
mistake. Once before [p. 49] I ventured to tell you that you
nourish a deeply rooted faith in undetermined psychical events
and in free will, but that this is quite unscientific and must yield
to the demand of a determinism whose rule extends over mental
fife. I beg you to respect it as a fact that that is what occurred to
the man when he was questioned and nothing else. But I am
not opposing one faith with another. It can be proved that the
idea produced by the man was not arbitrary nor indeterminable
nor unconnected with what we were looking for. Indeed, not
long ago I learnt—without, I may say, attaching too much
importance to the fact—that experimental psychology too had
brought up evidence to that effect.1

In view of the importance of the matter, I will ask for your
special attention. If I ask someone to tell me what occurs to
him in response to a particular element of a dream, I am ask­
ing him to surrender himself to free association while keeping an
idea in mind as a starting-point. This calls for a special attitude of
the attention which is quite different from reflection and which
excludes reflection. Some people achieve this attitude with ease;
others show an incredibly high degree of clumsiness when they
attempt it. There is, however, a higher degree of freedom of
1 [A footnote dealing with this was added by Freud in 1919 to

I. ofD., 4, 181-2.]

VI. THE TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION 107

association: that is to say, I may drop the insistence on keeping
an initial idea in mind and only lay down the sort or kind of
association I want—I may, for instance, require the experi­
menter to allow a proper name or a number to occur to him
freely. What then occurs to him would presumably be even
more arbitrary and more indeterminable than with our own
technique. It can be shown, however, that it is always strictly
determined by important internal attitudes of mind which are
not known to us at the moment at which they operate—which
are as little known to us as the disturbing purposes of para­
praxes and the provoking ones of chance actions [p. 61].
I and many others after me have repeatedly made such ex­
periments with names and numbers thought of at random, and
a few of these have been published.1 Here the procedure is to
produce a series of associations to the name which has emerged;
these latter associations are accordingly no longer completely
free but have a link, like the associations to the elements of
dreams. One continues doing this until one finds the impulse
exhausted. But by then light will have been thrown both on the
motive and the meaning of the random choice of the name.
These experiments always lead to the same result; reports on
them often cover a wealth of material and call for extensive
expositions. The associations to numbers chosen at random are
perhaps the most convincing; they run off so quickly and pro­
ceed with such incredible certainty to a hidden goal that the
effect is really staggering. I will give you only one example of an
analysis like this of a name, since dealing with it calls for a
conveniently small amount of material.
In the course of treating a young man I had occasion to dis­
cuss this topic, and mentioned the thesis that, in spite of an
apparently arbitrary choice, it is impossible to think of a name
at random which does not turn out to be closely determined by
the immediate circumstances, the characteristics of the subject
of the experiment and his situation at the moment. Since he was
sceptical, I suggested that he should make an experiment of the
kind himself on the spot. I knew that he carried on particularly
numerous relationships of every kind with married women and
1 [Several examples are given in Section A of Chapter XII of The
Psychopathology of Everyday Life (19014), Standard Ed., 6,240 ff., where the
whole topic is discussed at length.]
s.f. xv—H

108

DREAMS

girls, so I thought he would have a specially large choice open
to him if it were to be a woman’s name that he was asked to
choose. He agreed to this. To my astonishment, or rather, per­
haps, to his, no avalanche of women’s names broke over me; he
remained silent for a moment and then admitted that only a
single name had come into his head and none other besides:
‘Albine’.—How curious! But what does that name mean to you?
How many ‘Albines’ do you know?—Strange to say, he knew no
one called ‘Albine’ and nothing further occurred to him in
response to the name. So it might be thought that the analysis
had failed. But not at all: it was already complete, and no
further associations were needed. The man had an unusually
fair complexion and in conversation during the treatment I had
often jokingly called him an albino. We were engaged at the
time in determining the feminine part of his constitution. So
it was he himself who was this ‘Albine’, the woman who was the
most interesting to him at the moment.
In the same way tunes that come into one’s head without
warning turn out to be determined by and to belong to a train
of thought which has a right to occupy one’s mind though
without one’s being aware of its activity. It is easy to show then
that the relation to the tune is based on its text or its origin.
But I must be careful not to extend this assertion to really
musical people, of whom, as it happens, I have had no ex­
perience. It may be that for such people the musical content of
the tune is what decides its emergence. The earlier case is cer­
tainly the commoner one. I know of a young man, for instance,
who was positively persecuted for a time by the tune (incident­
ally a charming one) of Paris’s song in [Offenbach’s] La belle
Helene, till his analysis drew his attention to a contemporary
competition in his interest between an ‘Ida’ and a ‘Helen’.1
If then things that occur to one quite freely are determined
in this way and form parts of a connected whole, we shall no
doubt be justified in concluding that things that occur to one
with a single link—namely their link with the idea which serves
as their starting-point—cannot be any less determined. Investi­
gation shows, in fact, that, apart from the link we have given
1 [Paris, who eloped with Helen, was at one time a shepherd on
Mount Ida, where he delivered his judgement between three competing
goddesses.]

VI. THE TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION 109
them with the initial idea, they are found to be dependent as
well on groups of strongly emotional thoughts and interests,
‘complexes’, whose participation is not known at the moment
—that is to say, is unconscious.
The occurrence of ideas with links of this kind has been the
subject of very instructive experimental researches, which have
played a notable part in the history of psycho-analysis. The
school of Wundt had introduced what are known as association­
experiments, in which a stimulus word is called out to the subject
and he has the task of replying to it as quickly as possible with
any reaction that occurs to him. It is then possible to study the
interval that passes between the stimulus and the reaction, the
nature of the answer given as a reaction, possible errors when
the same experiment is repeated later, and so on. The Zurich
school, led by Bleuler and Jung, found the explanation of the
reactions that followed in the association-experiment by getting
the subjects to throw light on their reactions by means of sub­
sequent associations, if those reactions had shown striking
features. It then turned out that these striking reactions were
determined in the most definite fashion by the subject’s com­
plexes. In this manner Bleuler and Jung built the first bridge
from experimental psychology to psycho-analysis.

Having learnt thus much, you will be able to say: ‘We
acknowledge now that thoughts that occur to one freely are
determined and not arbitrary as we supposed. We admit that
this is also true of thoughts occurring in response to the elements
of dreams. But that is not what we are concerned with. You
assert that what occurs to the dreamer in response to the dream­
element will be determined by the psychical background (un­
known to us) of that particular element. This does not seem to
us to be proved. We quite expect that what occurs to the
dreamer in response to the dream-element will turn out to be
determined by one of the dreamer’s complexes, but what good
does that do us? This does not lead us to an understanding of
dreams but, like the association-experiment, to a knowledge of
these so-called complexes. But what have they got to do with
dreams?’
You are right, but you are overlooking one factor. Moreover
it is precisely the factor on account of which I did not choose

110

DREAMS

the association-experiment as the starting-point of this ex­
position. In that experiment the single determinant of the re­
action—that is, the stimulus-word—is arbitrarily chosen by us.
The reaction is in that case an intermediary between the
stimulus-word and the complex which has been aroused in the
subject. In dreams the stimulus-word is replaced by something
that is itself derived from the dreamer’s mental life, from sources
unknown to him, and may therefore very easily itself be a ‘de­
rivative of a complex’. It is therefore not precisely fantastic to
suppose that the further associations linked to the dream-ele­
ments will be determined by the same complex as that of the
element itself and will lead to its discovery.
Let me show you from another instance that the facts are as
we expect. The forgetting of proper names is actually an excel­
lent model of what happens in dream-analysis; the difference is
only that events that are shared between two people in dream­
analysis are combined in a single person in the parapraxis. If I
forget a name temporarily, I nevertheless feel in myself a cer­
tainty that I know it—a certainty which in the case of the
dreamer we only arrived at by the round-about path of the
Bernheim experiment [p. 103]. The name which I have for­
gotten but which I know is, however, not accessible to me. Ex­
perience soon teaches me that thinking about it, with however
much effort, is of no help. But in place of the forgotten name I
can always call up one or several substitute names. It is only
after a substitute name of this kind has occurred to me spon­
taneously that the conformity of this situation with that of
dream-interpretation becomes obvious. Like this substitute
name, the dream-element is not the right thing, but only takes
the place of something else—of the genuine tiling which I do
not know and which I am to discover by means of the dream­
analysis. The difference is once more only that in the case of
forgetting the name, I recognize the substitute unhesitatingly as
something ungenuine, whereas we had to acquire this view
laboriously in the case of the dream-element. Now in the case
of forgetting a name there is also a method by which we can
start from the substitute and arrive at the unconscious genuine
thing, the forgotten name. If I direct my attention to the sub­
stitute names and allow further ideas in response to them to
occur to me, I arrive by shorter or longer detours at the for-

VI. THE TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION 111

gotten name, and I find when this happens that both the spon­
taneous substitute name and the ones that I have called up are
connected with the forgotten one and were determined by it.
I will describe an analysis of this kind to you. I noticed one
day that I could not recall the name of the small country on
the Riviera, of which Monte Carlo is the chief town. It was very
tiresome, but so it was. I summoned up all that I knew about
that country. I thought of Prince Albert of the House of
Lusignan, of his marriages, of his devotion to deep-sea re­
searches, and everything else I could bring together, but it was
of no avail. So I gave up reflection and allowed substitute
names to occur to me instead of the lost one. They came
rapidly: Monte Carlo itself, then Piedmont, Albania, Monte­
video, Colico. Of this series I was struck first by Albania, which
was at once replaced by Montenegro, no doubt because of the
contrast between white and black.11 then saw that four of these
substitute names contained the same syllable ‘mon’, then sud­
denly I had the forgotten word and exclaimed aloud: ‘Monaco!’
So the substitute names had in fact arisen from the forgotten
one: the first four came from its first syllable while the last
reproduced its syllabic structure and its whole last syllable.
Moreover I was able to discover quite easily what it was that
had temporarily deprived me of the name. Monaco is also the
Italian name for Munich; and it was that town which exerted
the inhibitory influence.2
No doubt this example is a good one, but it is too simple. In
other cases it would have been necessary to call up a longer
string of ideas in response to the first substitute name. I have
had experiences of that sort too. On one occasion a stranger had
invited me to drink some Italian wine with him, but when we
were in the inn it turned out that he had forgotten the name of
the wine which he intended to order because of his very agree­
able recollections of it. From a quantity of substitute ideas of
different kinds which came into his head in place of the for­
gotten name, I was able to infer that thoughts about someone
called Hedwig had made him forget the name. And he not only
confirmed the fact that he had first tasted this wine when he
1 [‘Alius’ the Latin for ‘white’, and ‘negro' the Italian for ‘black’.]
2 [This episode is described more briefly in The Psychopathology of
Everyday Life, Standard Ed., 6, 55.]

112

DREAMS

was with someone of that name, but with the help of this dis­
covery he recalled the name of the wine. He was happily mar­
ried at the present time and this Hedwig belonged to earlier
days which he had no wish to remember.
But if it is possible in the case of forgetting a name, it must
also be possible in interpreting dreams to proceed from the sub­
stitute along the chain of associations attached to it and so to
obtain access to the genuine thing which is being held back.
From the example of the forgotten name we may conclude that
the associations to the dream-element will be determined both
by the dream-element and also by the unconscious genuine
thing behind it. In this way, then, we seem to have produced
some justification of our technique.

LECTURE VII

THE MANIFEST CONTENT OF
DREAMS AND THE LATENT
DREAM-THOUGHTS
Ladies and Gentlemen,—As you see, our study of parapraxes
has not been unprofitable. Thanks to our labours over them
we have, subject to the premisses I have explained to you,1
achieved two things: a conception of the nature of dream­
elements and a technique for interpreting dreams. The con­
ception of dream-elements tells us that they are ungenuine
things [p. 110], substitutes for something else that is unknown
to the dreamer (like the purpose of a parapraxis), substitutes for
something the knowledge of which is present in the dreamer but
which is inaccessible to him. We are in hopes that it will be
possible to carry over the same conception to whole dreams,
which are made up of such elements. Our technique lies in
employing free association to these elements in order to bring
about the emergence of other substitutive structures, which
will enable us to arrive at what is concealed from view.
I now propose that we should introduce a change into
our nomenclature which will give us more freedom of move­
ment. Instead of speaking of ‘concealed’, ‘inaccessible’, or
‘ungenuine’,2 let us adopt the correct description and say ‘in­
accessible to the dreamer’s consciousness’ or ‘unconscious’.3 I
mean nothing else by this than what may be suggested to you
when you think of a word that has escaped you or the disturb­
ing purpose in a parapraxis—that is to say, I mean nothing else
than ‘unconscious at the moment’. In contrast to this, we can of
course speak of the dream-elements themselves, and the sub­
stitutive ideas that have been newly arrived at from them by
association, as ‘conscious’. This nomenclature so far involves no
1 [See pp. 100 and 101.]
* [‘Uneigentlich' in all the German editions. The sense would seem to
require ‘eigentlich (genuine)’.]
3 [Cf. Lecture I, p. 21; the discussion is continued below in Lecture
XIII, p. 212.]
113

114

DREAMS

theoretical construction. No objection can be made to using
the word ‘unconscious’ as an apt and easily understandable
description.
If we carry over our conception of the separate elements to
the whole dream, it follows that the dream as a whole is a dis­
torted substitute for something else, something unconscious, and
that the task of interpreting a dream is to discover this uncon­
scious material. From this, however, there at once follow three
important rules, which we must obey during the work of inter­
preting dreams.
(1) We must not concern ourselves with what the dream
appears to tell us, whether it is intelligible or absurd, clear or
confused, since it cannot possibly be the unconscious material
we are in search of. (An obvious limitation to this rule will force
itself on our notice later [p. 126].) (2) We must restrict our
work to calling up the substitutive ideas for each element, we
must not reflect about them, or consider whether they contain
anything relevant, and we must not trouble ourselves with how
far they diverge from the dream-element. (3) We must wait
till the concealed unconscious material we are in search of
emerges of its own accord, exactly as the forgotten word
‘Monaco’ did in the experiment I have described [p. 111].
Now, too, we can understand to what extent it is a matter of
indifference how much or how little the dream is remembered
and, above all, how accurately or how uncertainly. For the re­
membered dream is not the genuine material but a distorted
substitute for it, which should assist us, by calling up other sub­
stitutive images, to come nearer to the genuine material, to
make what is unconscious in the dream conscious. If our
memory has been inaccurate, therefore, it has merely made a
further distortion of this substitute—a distortion, moreover,
which cannot have been without a reason.
The work of interpreting can be performed on one’s own
dreams just as on other people’s. In fact one learns more from
one’s own: the process carries more conviction. If, then, we
make the attempt, we notice that something is opposing our
work. It is true that ideas occur to us, but we do not allow all
of them to count; testing and selecting influences make them­
selves felt. In the case of one idea we may say to ourselves: ‘No,
this is not revelent, it does not belong here’; in the case of

VII. MANIFEST AND LATENT ELEMENTS

115

another: ‘this is too senseless’ and of a third: ‘this is totally un­
important’. And we can further observe how with objections of
this sort we may smother ideas and finally expel them alto­
gether, even before they have become quite clear. Thus on the
one hand we keep too close to the idea which was our starting­
point, the dream-element itself; and on the other hand we inter­
fere with the outcome of the free associations by making a
selection. If we are not by ourselves while interpreting the
dream, if we get someone else to interpret it, we become very
clearly aware of yet another motive which we employ in
making this illicit selection, for sometimes we say to our­
selves: ‘No, this idea is too disagreeable; I will not or cannot
report it.’
These objections are obviously a threat to the success of our
work. We must guard against them, and in our own case we do
so by firmly resolving not to give way to them. If we are
analysing someone else’s dream, we do so by laying it down as
an inviolable rule that he must not hold back any idea from us,
even if it gives rise to one of the four objections—of being too
unimportant or too senseless or of being irrelevant or too dis­
tressing to be reported.1 The dreamer promises to obey the rule,
and we may be annoyed afterwards to find how badly he keeps
his promise when the occasion arises. We may explain this to
ourselves to begin with by supposing that, in spite of our
authoritative assurance, he has not yet realized the justification
for free association, and we may perhaps have the notion of first
convincing him theoretically by giving him books to read or by
sending him to lectures which may convert him into a supporter
of our views on free association. But we shall be held back from
blunders like this when we consider that in the case of our­
selves, as to the strength of whose convictions we can, after all,
hardly be in doubt, the same objections arise to certain ideas
and are only set aside subsequently—by a court of appeal, as
it were.
Instead of being annoyed by the dreamer’s disobedience, we
may take advantage of these experiences by learning something
new from them—something which is all the more important the
1 [Freud returns to this ‘fundamental technical rule of analysis’ in
Lecture XIX, p. 287 below, where an Editor’s footnote gives further
references.]

116

DREAMS

less we are expecting it. We perceive that the work of inter­
preting dreams is carried out in the face of a resistance, which
opposes it and of which the critical objections are manifesta­
tions.1 This resistance is independent of the dreamer’s theoreti­
cal conviction. We learn still more, indeed. We discover that a
critical objection of this kind never turns out to be justified. On
the contrary, the ideas which people try to suppress in this way
turn out invariably to be the most important ones and those
which are decisive in our search for the unconscious material.
It amounts, in fact, to a special distinguishing mark, if an idea
is accompanied by an objection like this.
This resistance is something entirely new: a phenomenon
which we have come upon in connection with our premisses
[p. 101 f.], but one which was not included among them. The
appearance of this new factor in our reckoning comes to us as a
not altogether pleasant surprise. We suspect at once that it is
not going to make our work any easier. It might mislead us into
abandoning our whole concern with dreams: something so un­
important as a dream and, on top of that, all these difficulties
instead of a simple straightforward technique! But, on the other
hand, the difficulties might act precisely as a stimulus and make
us suspect that the work will be worth the trouble. We regularly
come up against resistance when we try to make our way for­
ward from the substitute which is the dream-element to the un­
conscious material hidden behind it. So we may conclude that
there must be something of importance concealed behind the
substitute. Otherwise, what is the point of the difficulties that
are trying to keep the concealment going? If a child refuses to
open his clenched fist to show what he has in it, we may feel
sure that it is something wrong—something he ought not to
have.
The moment we introduce the dynamic idea of a resistance
into the facts of the case, we must simultaneously reflect that
this factor is something variable in quantity. There may be
greater and smaller resistances, and we are prepared to find
these differences showing themselves during our work as well.
We may perhaps be able to link with this another experience
we also meet with during the work of interpreting dreams:
sometimes it requires only a single response, or no more than a
1 [The subject of ‘resistance’ is fully dealt with in Lecture XIX.]

VII. MANIFEST AND LATENT ELEMENTS

117

few, to lead us from a dream-element to the unconscious
material behind it, while on other occasions long chains of
associations and the overcoming of many critical objections are
required for bringing this about. We shall conclude that these
differences relate to the changing magnitude of the resistance,
and we shall probably turn out to be right.1 If the resistance is
small, the substitute cannot be far distant from the unconscious
material; but a greater resistance means that the unconscious
material will be greatly distorted and that the path will be a
long one from the substitute back to the unconscious material.

And now perhaps it is time to take a dream and try our
technique upon it and see whether our expectations are con­
firmed. Yes, but what dream are we to choose for the purpose?
You cannot imagine how hard I find it to decide; nor can I yet
make the nature of my difficulties plain to you. There must
obviously be dreams which have on the whole been subjected to
only a little distortion, and the best plan would be to begin
with them. But what dreams have been least distorted? The
ones that are intelligible and not confused, two examples of
which I have already put before you [p. 97]? That would be
leading us quite astray. Investigation shows that such dreams
have been subjected to an extraordinarily high degree of dis­
tortion. If, however, I were to disregard particular require­
ments and were to select a dream at haphazard, you would
probably be greatly disappointed. We might have to notice or
record such a profusion of ideas in response to the separate
dream-elements that we should be unable to make head or tail
of the work. If we write down a dream and then make a note of
all the ideas that emerge in response to it, these may prove to
be many times longer than the text of the dream. The best plan
would therefore seem to be to choose out a number of short
dreams for analysis, each of which will at least tell us something
or confirm some point. So we will make up our minds to take
that course, unless experience may perhaps show us where we
can really find dreams that have been only slightly distorted.1
2
1 [Freud discussed the effects on dream-interpretation of a high or low
pressure of resistance in Section II of his ‘Remarks on the Theory and
Practice of Dream-Interpretation’ (1923c), Standard Ed., 19, 110.]
2 [See the following lecture.]

118

DREAMS

I can however think of something else that will make things
easier for us—something, moreover, which lies along our path.
Instead of starting on the interpretation of whole dreams, we
will restrict ourselves to a few dream-elements, and we will
trace out in a number of examples how these can be explained
by applying our technique to them.

(a) A lady reported that she very often dreamt when she was
a child that God wore a paper cocked-hat on his head. What can you
make of that without the dreamer’s help? It sounds completely
nonsensical. But it ceases to be nonsense when we hear from the
lady that she used to have a hat of that sort put on her head at
meals when she was a child, because she could never resist
taking furtive glances at her brothers’ and sisters’ plates to see
whether they had been given larger helpings than she had. So
the hat was intended to act like a pair of blinkers. This, in­
cidentally, was a piece of historical information [p. 105 f.] and
was given without any difficulty. The interpretation of this ele­
ment and at the same time of the whole short dream was easily
made with the help of a further idea that occurred to the
dreamer: ‘As I had heard that God was omniscient and saw
everything’, she said, ‘the dream can only mean that I knew
everything and saw everything, even though they tried to
prevent me.’1 Perhaps this example is too simple.
(J) A sceptical woman patient had a longish dream in the
course of which some people told her about my book on jokes
[1905c] and praised it highly. Something came in then about a
‘channel’, perhaps it was another book that mentioned a channel, or
something else about a channel... she didn’t know ... it was all so
indistinct.
No doubt you will be inclined to expect that the element
‘channel’, since it was so indistinct, would be inaccessible to
interpretation. You are right in suspecting a difficulty; but the
difficulty did not arise from the indistinctness: both the diffi­
culty and the indistinctness arose from another cause. Nothing
occurred to the dreamer in connection with ‘channel’, and I
could of course throw no light on it. A little later—it was the
next day, in point of fact—she told me that she had thought of
1 [This dream is reported in I. of D., 5, 413-14.]

VII. MANIFEST AND LATENT ELEMENTS

119

something that might have something to do with it. It was a
joke, too,—a joke she had heard. On the steamer between
Dover and Calais a well-known author fell into conversation
with an Englishman. The latter had occasion to quote the
phrase: ‘Du sublime au ridicule il n’y a qu’un pas. [It is only a
step from the sublime to the ridiculous.]’ ‘Yes,’ replied the
author, (le Pas de Calais'—meaning that he thought France sub­
lime and England ridiculous. But the Pas de Calais is a channel
—the English Channel. You will ask whether I think this had
anything to do with the dream. Certainly I think so; and it pro­
vides the solution of the puzzling element of the dream. Can
you doubt that this joke was already present before the dream
occurred, as the unconscious thought behind the element
‘channel’? Can you suppose that it was introduced as a subse­
quent invention? The association betrayed the scepticism which
lay concealed behind the patient’s ostensible admiration; and
her resistance against revealing this was no doubt the common
cause both of her delay in producing the association and of the
indistinctness of the dream-element concerned. Consider the re­
lation of the dream-element to its unconscious background: it
was, as it were, a fragment of the background, an allusion to
it, but it was made quite incomprehensible by being isolated.1

(r) As part of a longish dream a patient dreamt that several
members of hisfamily were sitting round a table of a peculiar shape, etc.
It occurred to him in connection with the table that he had
seen a piece of furniture of the kind when he was on a visit to
a particular family. His thoughts then went on to say that there
was a peculiar relationship between the father and son in this
family; and he soon added that the same thing was true of the
relationship between himself and his own father. So the table
had been taken into the dream in order to point out this
parallel.
This dreamer had been long familiar with the requirement
of dream-interpretation. Another person might perhaps have
taken objection to such a trivial detail as the shape of a table
being made the subject of investigation. But in fact we regard
nothing in a dream as accidental or indifferent, and we expect
1 [The whole of this example (3) was inserted by Freud into I. of D.
as a footnote in 1919 (5, 517-18).]

120

DREAMS

to obtain information precisely from the explanation of such
trivial and pointless details. You may perhaps also feel sur­
prised that the thought that ‘the same thing was true of us and
of them’ should have been expressed by, in particular, the
choice of a table [TircA]. But this too becomes clear when you
learn that the name of the family in question was Tischler
[literally, ‘carpenter’]. By making his relations sit at this Tisch,
he was saying that they too were Tischlers. Incidentally, you will
notice how inevitably one is led into being indiscreet when one
reports these dream-interpretations. And you will guess that
this is one of the difficulties I have hinted at over the choice of
examples. I could easily have taken another example in place
of this one, but I should probably merely have avoided this
indiscretion at the price of committing another.
The moment seems to me to have arrived for introducing
two terms, which we could have made use of long ago. We will
describe what the dream actually tells us as the manifest dream­
content, and the concealed material, which we hope to reach by
pursuing the ideas that occur to the dreamer, as the latent
dream-thoughts. Thus we are here considering the relations be­
tween the manifest content of the dream and the latent dream­
thoughts as shown in these examples. These relations may be of
very many different kinds. In examples (a) and (fi) the mani­
fest element is also a constituent of the latent thoughts, though
only a small fragment of them. A small piece of the large and
complicated psychical structure of unconscious dream-thoughts
has made its way into the manifest dream as well—a fragment
of them, or, in other cases, an allusion to them, a caption, as it
were, or an abbreviation in telegraphic style. It is the business
of the work of interpretation to complete these fragments or this
allusion into a whole—which was achieved particularly nicely
in the case of example (b). Thus one form of the distortion which
constitutes the dream-work is replacement by a fragment or an
allusion. In example (c) another kind of relation is to be
observed in addition; and we shall find this expressed in a purer
and clearer form in the examples which follow.

(J) The dreamer was pulling a lady (a particular one, of his
acquaintance) outfrom behind a bed. He himself found the mean-

VII. MANIFEST AND LATENT ELEMENTS

121

ing of this dream-element from the first idea that occurred to
him. It meant that he was giving this lady preference.1
(e) 'Another man dreamt that his brother was in a box [Kasten].
In his first response 'Kasten’ was replaced by 'Schrank [cup­
board]’, and the second gave the interpretation: his brother
was restricting himself [‘schrankt sich ein’].s

(f) The dreamer climbed to the top of a mountain, which com­
manded an unusually extensive view. This sounds quite rational and
you might suppose that there is nothing to interpret in it and
that all we have to do is to enquire what memory gave rise to
the dream and the reason for its being stirred up. But you
would be wrong. It turned out that this dream stood in need of
interpreting just as much as any other, more confused one. For
none of his own mountain climbs occurred to the dreamer, but
he thought of the fact that an acquaintance of his was the
editor of a ‘Survey’, dealing with our relations with the most
remote parts of the earth. Thus the latent dream-thought was
an identification of the dreamer with the ‘surveyor’.
Here we have a new type of relation between the manifest
and latent dream-elements. The former is not so much a dis­
tortion of the latter as a representation of it, a plastic, concrete,
portrayal of it, taking its start from the wording. But precisely
on that account it is once more a distortion, for we have long
since forgotten from what concrete image the word originated
and consequently fail to recognize it when it is replaced by the
image. When you consider that the manifest dream is made up
predominantly of visual images and more rarely of thoughts and
words, you can imagine what importance attaches to this kind
of relation in the construction of dreams. You will see, too, that
in this way it becomes possible in regard to a large number of
abstract thoughts to create pictures to act as substitutes for
them in the manifest dream while at the same time serving the
purpose of concealment. This is the technique of the familiar
1 [This example, like the next, depends on a purely verbal point:
the resemblance between the German words for ‘pulling out’ hervor
ziehen) and ‘preferring’ (vorziehm). From I. of D., 5, 409.]
a [This and the next example are from I. of D., 5, 407.]

122

DREAMS

picture-puzzles. Why it is that these representations have an
appearance of being jokes is a special problem into which we
need not enter here.1
There is a fourth kind of relation between the manifest and
latent elements, which I must continue to hold back from you
until we come upon its key-word in considering technique.12*4
Even so I shall not have given you a full list; but it will serve
our purpose.
Do you feel bold enough now to venture upon the inter­
pretation of a whole dream? Let us make the experiment, to see
whether we are well enough equipped for the task. I shall of
course not select one of the most obscure ones; nevertheless, it
will be one that gives a well-marked picture of the attributes of
a dream.8

Very well then. A lady who, though she was still young, had
been married for many years had the following dream: She was
at the theatre with her husband. One side of the stalls was completely
empty. Her husband told her that Elise L. and her fiance had wanted to
go too, but had only been able to get bad seats—three for 1 florin
50 kreuzersi—and of course they could not take those. She thought it
would not really have done any harm if they had.
The first thing the dreamer reported to us was that the pre­
cipitating cause of the dream was touched on in its manifest
content. Her husband had in fact told her that Elise L., who
was approximately her contemporary, had just become en­
gaged. The dream was a reaction to this information. We know
already [p. 106] that it is easy in the case of many dreams to
point to a precipitating cause like this from the previous day,
and that the dreamer is often able to trace this for us without
any difficulty. The dreamer in the present case put similar in1 [See the discussion of the point in Chapter VI of Freud’s book on
jokes (1905c), Standard Ed., 8, 173; cf. also p. 235 f. below.]
2 [See below, p. 151.]
8 [The dream which follows had been analysed, but very much less
elaborately, in I. of D., 5, 415-16. It is also discussed in Chapters VII
and VIII of the short work On Dreams (1901a), ibid, 5, 669-70 and 673.
Freud returns to it in these lectures at several points: pp. 139-40, 178,
219-21 and 224-5 below.]
4 [This had at the time been worth approximately 2s. 6d. or 62J
cents.]

VII. MANIFEST AND LATENT ELEMENTS

123

formation at our disposal for other elements of the manifest
dream as well.—Where did the detail come from about one side
of the stalls being empty? It was an allusion to a real event of
the previous week. She had planned to go to a particular play
and had therefore bought her tickets early—so early that she had
had to pay a booking fee. When they got to the theatre it
turned out that her anxiety was quite uncalled-for, since one
side of the stalls was almost empty. It would have been early
enough if she had bought the tickets on the actual day of the
performance. Her husband had kept on teasing her for having
been in too much of a hurry.—What was the origin of the
1 florin 50 kreuzers? It arose in quite another connection, which
had nothing to do with the former one but also alluded to some
information from the previous day. Her sister-in-law had been
given a present of 150 florins by her husband and had been in a
great hurry—the silly goose—to rush off to the jewellers’ and
exchange the money for a piece of jewellery.—Where did the
‘three’ come from? She could think of nothing in connection
with that, unless we counted the idea that her newly-engaged
friend, Elise L., was only three months her junior, though she
herself had been a married woman for nearly ten years.—And
the absurd notion of taking three tickets for only two people?
She had nothing to say to that, and refused to report any
further ideas or information.
But all the same, she had given us so much material in these
few associations that it was possible to guess the latent dream­
thoughts from them. We cannot help being struck by the fact
that periods of time occur at several points in the information
she gave us about the dream, and these provide a common
factor between the different parts of the material. She took the
theatre tickets too early, bought them over-hurriedly so that she
had to pay more than was necessary; so too her sister-in-law
had been in a hurry to take her money to the jewellers and buy
some jewellery with it, as though otherwise she would miss it.
If, in addition to the ‘too early’ and ‘in a hurry’ which we have
stressed, we take into account the precipitating cause of the
dream—the news that her friend, though only three months her
junior, had nevertheless got an excellent husband—and the
criticism of her sister-in-law expressed in the idea that it was
absurd of her to be in such a hurry, then we find ourselves
s.f. xv—I

124

DREAMS

presented almost spontaneously with the following construction
of the latent dream-thoughts, for which the manifest dream is
a severely distorted substitute:
‘Really it was absurd of me to be in such a hurry to get mar­
ried! I can see from Elise’s example that I could have got a
husband later too.’ (Being in too great a hurry was represented
by her own behaviour in buying the tickets and by her sister­
in-law’s in buying the jewellery. Going to the play appeared as
a substitute for getting married.) This would seem to be the
main thought. We may perhaps proceed further, though wiht
less certainty, since the analysis ought not to have been without
the dreamer’s comments at these points: ‘And I could have got
one a hundred times better with the money!’ (150 florins is a
hundred times more than 1 florin 50.) If we were to put her
dowry in place of the money, it would mean that her husband
was bought with her dowry: the jewellery, and the bad tickets
as well, would be substitutes for her husband. It would be still
more satisfactory if the actual element ‘three tickets’ had some­
thing to do with a husband. [Cf. below, p. 220.] But we have
not got so far as that in our understanding of the dream. We
have only discovered that the dream expresses the low value
assigned by her to her own husband and her regret at having
married so early.
We shall, I fancy, be more surprised and confused than satis­
fied by the outcome of this first dream-interpretation. We have
been given too much in one dose—more than we are yet able
to cope with. We can already see that we shall not exhaust the
lessons of this interpretation of a dream. Let us hasten to single
out what we can recognize as established new discoveries.
In the first place, it is a remarkable thing that the main
emphasis in the latent thoughts lies on the element of being in
too great a hurry; nothing of the sort is to be found in the mani­
fest dream. Without the analysis, we should have had no sus­
picion that that factor plays any part. It seems, therefore, to be
possible for what is in fact the main thing, the centre of the un­
conscious thoughts, to be absent in the manifest dream. This
means that the impression made by the whole dream must be
fundamentally altered. In the second place, there is an absurd
combination in the dream: three for 1 florin 50. We detected in
the dream-thoughts the assertion that ‘it was absurd (to marry

VII. MANIFEST AND LATENT ELEMENTS

125

so early)’. Gan it be doubted that this thought, ‘it was absurd’,
is represented by the inclusion of an absurd element in the
manifest dream? And in the third place, a glance of comparison
shows us that the relation between the manifest and latent ele­
ments is no simple one; it is far from being the case that one
manifest element always takes the place of one latent one. It is
rather that there is a group-relation between the two layers,
within which one manifest element can replace several latent
ones or one latent element can be replaced by several manifest
ones. [Cf. below, p. 173.]
As regards the meaning of the dream and the dreamer’s
attitude to it, we might point out much that is similarly sur­
prising. She agreed to the interpretation indeed, but she was
astonished at it. She was not aware that she assigned such a low
value to her husband; nor did she know why she should set such
a low value on him. So there is still much that is unintelligible
about it. It really seems to me that we are not yet equipped for
interpreting a dream and that we need first to be given some
further instruction and preparation.

LECTURE VIII

CHILDREN’S DREAMS
Ladies and Gentlemen,—I am under the impression that we
have advanced too quickly. Let us go back a little. Before we
made our last attempt at overcoming the difficulty of distortion
in dreams by the help of our technique, we were saying
[p. 117] that our best plan would be to get round the difficulty
by keeping to dreams in which there was no distortion or only
a very little—if such dreams exist. This will once more mean a
divergence from the historical development of our discoveries
[cf. p. 83]; for actually it was only after the technique of inter­
pretation had been consistently applied and distorted dreams
had been completely analysed that the existence of dreams that
are free from distortion came to our notice.
The dreams we are in search of occur in children.1 They are
short, clear, coherent, easy to understand and unambiguous;
but they are nevertheless undoubtedly dreams. You must not
suppose, however, that all children’s dreams are of this kind.
Dream-distortion sets in very early in childhood, and dreams
dreamt by children of between five and eight have been
reported which bear all the characteristics of later ones. But if
you limit yourselves to ages between the beginning of observable
mental activity and the fourth or fifth year, you will come upon
a number of dreams which possess the characteristics that can
be described as ‘infantile’ and you will find a few of the same
kind in later years of childhood. Indeed, under certain con­
ditions even adults have dreams which are quite similar to the
typically infantile ones.
From these children’s dreams we can draw conclusions with
great ease and certainty on the essential nature of dreams in
general, and we can hope that those conclusions will prove
decisive and universally valid.
(1) No analysis, no application of any technique is necessary
1 [There is no separate chapter on children’s dreams in I. of D., but
they are dealt with in Chapter III, 4,127 ff., where the examples in the
present lecture will be found again.]
126

VIII. CHILDREN’S DREAMS

127

in order to understand these dreams. There is no need to ques­
tion a child who tells us his dream. One has, however, to add a
piece of information to it from the events of the child’s life. There
is invariably some experience of the previous day which explains
the dream to us. The dream is the reaction of the child’s mental
life in his sleep to this experience of the previous day.
We will take a few examples on which to base our further
conclusions.
(a) A boy of 22 months was told to hand over a basket of
cherries to someone as a birthday present. He was obviously
very unwilling to do it, although he was promised that he should
have a few of them for himself. Next morning he reported
having dreamt: ‘Hermann eaten all the chewwies!'
(Z>) A girl of 3| years was taken across the lake for the first
time. At the landing-stage she did not want to leave the boat
and wept bitterly. The crossing had been too short for her.
Next morning she announced: ‘Last night I went on the lake' We
may safely add that this crossing had lasted longer.
(c) A boy of 5| years was taken on an excursion up the
Echerntal near Hallstatt.1 He had been told that Hallstatt was
at the foot of the Dachstein. He had shown great interest in this
mountain. There was a fine view of it from where he was stay­
ing at Aussee, and the Simony Hut on it could be made out
through a telescope. The child had often tried to see it through
the telescope—with what success was not known. The excursion
began in an atmosphere of cheerful expectation. Whenever a
fresh mountain came into view the boy asked: ‘Is that the
Dachstein?’ and he became more and more depressed the more
often he was told it was not. Finally he fell completely silent and
refused to go with the rest of the party up the short ascent to the
waterfall, and it was thought that he must be overtired. But next
morning he said with a radiant face: ‘Last night I dreamt we
were at the Simony Hut.' So that had been what he expected to do
on the excursion. He gave no further details except something
he had heard before: ‘You have to climb up steps for six hours.’
These three dreams will give us all the information we
require.
(2) As we can see, these children’s dreams are not senseless,
They are intelligible, completely valid mental acts. You will
1 [In the Salzkammergut district of Upper Austria.]

128

DREAMS

recall what I told you of the medical view of dreams and of the
analogy with unmusical fingers wandering over the keys of a
piano [p. 87.] You cannot fail to observe how sharply these
children’s dreams contradict this view. It would really be too
strange if children could perform complete mental functions in
their sleep while adults were content under the same conditions
with reactions which were no more than ‘twitchings’. More­
over, we have every reason to think that children’s sleep is
sounder and deeper.
(3) These dreams are without any dream-distortion, and
therefore call for no interpretative activity. Here the manifest
and the latent dream coincide. Thus dream-distortion is not part
of the essential nature of dreams. I expect this will be a weight off
your minds. But when we examine these dreams more closely,
we shall recognize a small piece of dream-distortion even in
them, a certain distinction between the manifest content of the
dream and the latent dream-thoughts.
(4) A child’s dream is a reaction to an experience of the
previous day, which has left behind it a regret, a longing, a wish
that has not been dealt with. The dream produces a direct, un­
disguisedfulfilment of that wish. Let us recall now our discussions
on the part played by somatic stimuli from outside and from
within as disturbers of sleep and instigators of dreams [p. 91 ff.].
In that connection we came to know some quite undoubted
facts, but by their means we were only able to explain a small
number of dreams. In these children’s dreams, however, there
is nothing that points to the operation of somatic stimuli of that
kind; we could not be mistaken in this, for the dreams are com­
pletely intelligible and easy to grasp. But this does not mean
that we need abandon the stimulus aetiology of dreams. We
can only ask how it has happened that from the first we have
• forgotten that besides somatic stimuli there are mental stimuli
that disturb sleep. We know, after all, that it is excitations of
this kind that are chiefly responsible for disturbing the sleep of
an adult by preventing him from establishing the mood required
for falling asleep—the withdrawing of interest from the world.
He does not want to interrupt his life but would rather continue
his work on the things he is concerned with, and for that reason
he does not fall asleep. In the case of children, therefore, the
stimulus that disturbs sleep is a mental one—the wish that has

VIII. CHILDREN’S DREAMS

129

not been dealt with—and it is to this that they react with the
dream.
(5) This gives us the most direct approach to understanding
the function of dreams. In so far as a dream is a reaction to a
psychical stimulus, it must be equivalent to dealing with the
stimulus in such a way that it is got rid of and that sleep can
continue. We do not yet know how this dealing with the
stimulus by the dream is made possible dynamically, but we
see already that dreams are not disturbers of sleep, as they are
abusively called, but guardians of sleep which get rid of disturbances
ofsleep. We think we should have slept more soundly if there had
been no dream, but we are wrong; in fact, without the help of
the dream we should not have slept at all. It is due to it that we
have slept as soundly as we have. It could not avoid disturbing
us a little, just as the night-watchman often cannot help making
a little noise while he chases away the disturbers of the peace
who seek to waken us with their noise.
(6) What instigates a dream is a wish, and the fulfilment of
that wish is the content of the dream—this is one of the chief
characteristics of dreams. The other, equally constant one, is
that a dream does not simply give expression to a thought, but
represents the wish fulfilled as a hallucinatory experience.1 'I
should like to go on the lake' is the wish that instigates the dream.
The content of the dream itself is: ‘I am going on the lake.’ Thus
even in these simple children’s dreams a difference remains
between the latent and the manifest dream, there is a distortion
of the latent dream-thought: the transformation of a thought into an
experience. In the process of interpreting a dream this alteration
must first be undone. If this turns out to be the most universal
characteristic of dreams, the fragment of dream which I
reported to you earlier [p. 121] ‘I saw my brother in a box
[Kasten]’ is not to be translated ‘my brother is restricting himself
[schnarkt sich ein]’ but ‘I should like my brother to restrict him­
self: my brother must restrict himself.’ Of the two general char­
acteristics of dreams which I have here brought forward, the
second clearly has more prospect of being accepted without
1 [It will be noted that the two ‘chief characteristics’ or ‘general
characteristics of dreams’ considered in what follows are not the same as
the two ‘things common to all dreams’ discussed in Lecture V, p. 88 ff.
above.]

130

DREAMS

contradiction than the first. It is only by means of far-reaching
investigations that we shall be able to establish the fact that
what instigates dreams must always be a wish and cannot be
a worry or an intention or a reproach; but this will not affect
the other characteristic—that the dream does not simply repro­
duce this stimulus, but removes it, gets rid of it, deals with it,
by means of a kind of experience.
(7) On the basis of these characteristics of dreams, we can
return once more to a comparison between a dream and a para­
praxis. In the latter we distinguished between a disturbing pur­
pose and a disturbed one [p. 61 ff.], and the parapraxis was a
compromise between them. A dream can be fitted into the same
pattern. The disturbed purpose can only be that of sleeping.
We may replace the disturbing one by the psychical stimulus,
or let us say by the wish which presses to be dealt with, since we
have not learnt so far of any other psychical stimulus that
disturbs sleep. Here the dream, too, is the result of a com­
promise. One sleeps, but one nevertheless experiences the re­
moving of a wish; one satisfies a wish, but at the same time one
continues to sleep. Both purposes are partly achieved and partly
abandoned.
(8) You will recall that at one point [p. 98] we hoped to
approach an understanding of the problems of dreams from the
fact that certain imaginative structures which are very trans­
parent to us are known as ‘day-dreams’. Now these day-dreams
are in fact wish-fulfilments, fulfilments of ambitions and erotic
wishes which are well known to us; but they are thought, even
though vividly imagined, and never experienced as hallucina­
tions. Of the two chief characteristics of dreams, then, the less
well assured is preserved here, while the other, since it depends
on the state of sleep and cannot be realized in waking life, is
entirely absent. Linguistic usage, therefore, has a suspicion of
the fact that wish-fulfilment is a chief characteristic of dreams.
Incidentally, if our experience in dreams is only a modified kind
of imagining made possible by the conditions of the state of
sleep—that is, a ‘nocturnal day-dreaming’—we can already
understand how the process of constructing a dream can dispose
of the nocturnal stimulus and bring satisfaction, since day­
dreaming too is an activity bound up with satisfaction and is
only practised, indeed, on that account.

VIII. CHILDREN’S DREAMS

131

But other usages of language express the same sense. There
are familiar proverbs such as ‘Pigs dream of acorns and geese
dream of maize’ or ‘What do hens dream of?—Of millet.’1 So
proverbs go even lower than we do—below children to animals
—and assert that the content of dreams is the satisfaction of a
need. Numbers of figures of speech seem to point in the same
direction: ‘lovely as a dream’, ‘I shouldn’t have dreamt of such
a thing’, ‘I haven’t imagined it in my wildest dreams’. In this,
linguistic usage is evidently taking sides. For there are anxiety­
dreams as well, and dreams with a distressing or indifferent
content; but linguistic usage has been unmoved by them. It is
true that it knows of ‘bad dreams’, but a dream pure and
simple is only the sweet fulfilment of a wish. Nor is there any
proverb which might tell us that pigs or geese dream of being
slaughtered.
It is inconceivable, of course, that the wish-fulfilling char­
acteristic of dreams should not have been noticed by writers on
the subject. On the contrary, it has often been noticed; but it
has not occurred to any of them to recognize this characteristic
as a universal one and to make it into a corner-stone for the
explanation of dreams. We can well imagine what it is that has
held them back from it and we shall go into the matter later on.
But consider what a large amount of light has been thrown on
things by our examination of children’s dreams, and with
scarcely any effort: the functions of dreams as the guardians of
sleep; their origin from two concurrent purposes, one of which,
the desire for sleep, remains constant, while the other strives to
satisfy a psychical stimulus; proof that dreams are psychical acts
with a sense; their two chief characteristics—wish-fulfilment and
hallucinatory experience. And in discovering all this we were al­
most able to forget that we were engaged on psycho-analysis.
Apart from its connection with parapraxes, our work has car­
ried no specific mark. Any psychologist, knowing nothing of the
postulates of psycho-analysis, might have been able to give this
explanation of children’s dreams. Why have they not done so?
If dreams of the infantile kind were the only ones, the
problem would be solved and our task finished, and that without
1 [A Hungarian and a Jewish proverb respectively. Cf. I. of D., 4,
132 and footnote.]

132

DREAMS

our questioning the dreamer or bringing in the unconscious or
resorting to free association. This is evidently where a continua­
tion of our task lies ahead. We have already found repeatedly
that characteristics which were claimed as being of general
validity have turned out to apply only to a particular sort
and number of dreams. The question for us is therefore whether
the general characteristics we inferred from children’s dreams
have a firmer footing, whether they also hold good of dreams
which are not transparently clear and whose manifest content
gives no sign of being connected with a wish left over from the
previous day. It is our view that these other dreams have under­
gone a far-reaching distortion and for that reason cannot be
judged at a first glance. We suspect too that to explain this
distortion we shall need the psycho-analytic technique which
we have been able to do without in the understanding we have
just gained of children’s dreams.
In any case, there is yet another class of dreams which are
undistorted and, like children’s dreams, can easily be recog­
nized as wish-fulfilments. These are the dreams which all
through life are called up by imperative bodily needs—hunger,
thirst, sexual need—that is, they are wish-fufilments as re­
actions to internal somatic stimuli. Thus I have a note of a
dream dreamt by a little girl of nineteen months, which con­
sisted of a menu, to which her own name was attached: ‘Anna F. ',
stwawbewwies, wild stwawbewwies, omblet, pudden!’ This was a
reaction to a day without food, owing to a digestive upset, which
had actually been traced back to the fruit which appeared twice
in the dream. The little girl’s grandmother—their combined
ages came to seventy years—was simultaneously obliged to go
without food for a whole day on account of a disturbance due to
a floating kidney. She dreamt the same night that she had been
‘asked out’ and had been served with the most appetizing
delicacies.
Observations on prisoners who have been compelled to
starve, and on people who have been subjected to privations on
travels and explorations, teach us that under these conditions
the satisfaction of their needs is regularly dreamt of. Thus Otto
Nordenskjold (1904, 1, 336 f.) writes as follows of the members
of his expedition while they were wintering in the Antarctic:
‘The direction taken by our innermost thoughts was very clearly

VIII. CHILDREN’S DREAMS

133

shown by our dreams, which were never more vivid or
numerous than at this time. Even those of us who otherwise
dreamt but rarely had long stories to tell in the morning when
we exchanged our latest experiences in this world of the
imagination. They were all concerned with the outside world
which was now so remote from us, though they were often
adapted to our actual circumstances. . . . Eating and drinking,
however, were the pivot round which our dreams most often
revolved. One of us, who had a special gift for attending large
luncheon parties during the night, was proud if he was able to
report in the morning that he had “got through a three-course
dinner”. Another of us dreamt of tobacco, of whole mountains
of tobacco; while a third dreamt of a ship in full sail coming in
across open water. Yet another dream is worth repeating. The
postman brought round the mail and gave a long explanation
of why we had had to wait so long for it: he had delivered it at
the wrong address and had only succeeded in recovering it with
great difficulty. We dreamt, of course, of still more impossible
things. But there was a most striking lack of imaginativeness
shown by almost all the dreams I dreamt myself or heard
described. It would certainly be of great psychological interest
if all these dreams could be recorded. And it will easily be
understood how much we longed for sleep, since it could offer
each one of us everything that he most eagerly desired.’ So too,
according to Du Prel [1885, 231], ‘Mungo Park, when he was
almost dying of thirst on one of his African journeys, dreamt
unceasingly of the well-watered valleys and meadows of his
home. Similarly, Baron Trenck, suffering torments of hunger
while he was a prisoner in the fortress at Magdeburg, dreamt of
being surrounded by sumptuous meals; and George Back, who
took part in Franklin’s first expedition, when he was almost
dying of starvation as a result of his fearful privations, dreamt
constantly and regularly of copious meals.’1
Anyone who has eaten some highly-spiced dish at dinner
and develops a thirst during the night is very likely to dream
that he is drinking.2 It is of course impossible to get rid of a
fairly strong need for food or drink by means of a dream. One
1 [These two quotations appear in I. of D., 4, 131-2, footnote.]
2 [A detailed analysis of a dream of this kind is given in I. of D., 4,
123 f.]

134

DREAMS

wakes up from a dream of this sort still feeling thirsty, and has
to have a drink of real water. The effect produced by the dream
is in this instance trivial from the practical point of view; but it
is none the less clear that it was produced with the aim of
protecting one’s sleep against a stimulus that was urging one to
wake up and take action. When the need is of less intensity
dreams of satisfaction often help one to get over it.
In the same way, dreams create satisfactions under the in­
fluence of sexual stimuli, but these show peculiarities which
deserve mention. Since it is characteristic of the sexual instinct
to be a degree less dependent on its object than hunger and
thirst, the satisfaction in dreams of emission can be a real one;
and in consequence of certain difficulties (which I shall have to
mention later) in its relation to its object, it happens with special
frequency that the real satisfaction is nevertheless attached to a
dream content which is obscure or distorted. This characteristic
of dreams of emission (as Otto Rank [1912a] has pointed out)
makes them particularly favourable subjects for the study of
dream-distortion.1 Furthermore, all adult dreams arising from
bodily needs usually contain, in addition to the satisfaction,
other material which is derived from purely psychical sources
of stimulation and requires interpretation before it can be
understood.
Moreover I do not mean to assert that the wish-fulfilment
dreams of adults which are constructed on infantile lines only
appear as reactions to the imperative needs that I have men­
tioned. We are acquainted as well with short, clear dreams of
this sort which, under the influence of some dominant situation,
arise out of what are unquestionably psychical sources of
stimulation. There are, for instance, dreams of impatience: if
someone has made preparations for a journey, for a theatrical
performance that is important to him, for going to a lecture or
paying a visit, he may dream of a premature fulfilment of his
expectation; he may, during the night before the event, see
himself arrived at his destination, present at the theatre, in
conversation with the person he is going to visit. Or there are
what are justly known as dreams of convenience, in which a
person who would like to sleep longer dreams that he is already
up and is washing, or is already at school, whereas he is really
1 [This is discussed more fully in. I. of D., 5, 402.]

VIII. CHILDREN’S DREAMS

135

still sleeping and would rather get up in a dream than in
reality.1 The wish to sleep, which we have recognized as regu­
larly playing a part in the construction of dreams, comes into
the open in these dreams and reveals itself in them as the
essential dream-constructor. There is good reason for ranking
the need to sleep alongside of the other great bodily needs.
Here is a reproduction of a picture by Schwind in the Schack
Gallery in Munich [see Frontispiece], which shows how
correctly the artist grasped the way in which dreams arise from
the dominant situation. Its title is ‘The Prisoner’s Dream’, a
dream whose content is bound to be his escape. It is a happy
point that he is to escape through the window, for it is the
stimulus of the light pouring in by the window that is putting
an end to the prisoner’s sleep. The gnomes who are clambering
up on one another no doubt represent the successive positions
which he himself would have had to take as he climbed up to
the level of the window; and, if I am not mistaken and am not
attributing too much deliberation to the artist, the topmost of
the gnomes, who is sawing through the bars—that is, who is
doing what the prisoner would like to do—has the same
features as himself.
.

In all dreams other than children’s dreams and those of an
infantile type our path is, as I have said, obstructed by dream­
distortion. We cannot tell, to begin with, whether these other
dreams too are wish-fulfilments as we suspect, we cannot guess
from their manifest content to what psychical stimulus they owe
their origin, and we cannot prove that they too are endeavour­
ing to get rid of that stimulus or in some way deal with it.
They must be interpreted—that is, translated—,their distortion
must be undone, and their manifest content replaced by their
latent one, before we can form a judgement as to whether what
we have found in infantile dreams can claim to be valid for all
dreams.
1 [A dream of this type is reported in I. of D., 4, 125.]

LECTURE IX

THE CENSORSHIP OF DREAMS
Ladies and Gentlemen,—The study of the dreams of children
has taught us the origin, the essential nature and the function
of dreams. Dreams are things which get rid of {psychical) stimuli
disturbing to sleep, by the method of hallucinatory satisfaction. We
have, however, only been able to explain one group of the
dreams of adults—those which we have described as dreams of
an infantile type. What the facts are about the others we cannot
yet say, but we do not understand them. We have arrived at a
provisional finding, however, whose importance we must not
under-estimate. Whenever a dream has been completely intelli­
gible to us, it has turned out to be the hallucinated fulfilment of
a wish. This coincidence cannot be a chance one nor a matter
of indifference.
We have assumed of dreams of another sort [p. 113 f.], on the
basis of various considerations and on the analogy of our views
on parapraxes, that they are a distorted substitute for an
unknown content, and that the first thing is to trace them back
to it. Our immediate task, then, is an enquiry which will lead
to an understanding of this distortion in dreams.
Dream-distortion is what makes a dream seem strange and
unintelligible to us. We want to know a number of things about
it: firstly, where it comes from—its dynamics—, secondly, what
it does and, lastly, how it does it. We can also say that dream­
distortion is carried out by the dream-work; and we want to
describe the dream-work and trace it back to the forces
operating in it.1
And now listen to this dream. It was recorded by a lady
belonging to our group,2 and, as she tells us, was derived from
a highly-esteemed and cultivated elderly lady. No analysis was
made of the dream; our informant remarks that for a psycho­
analyst it needs no interpreting. Nor did the dreamer herself
interpret it, but she judged it and condemned it as though she
1 [The dream-work is discussed in Lecture XI.]
2 Frau Dr. von Hug-Hellmuth [1915].
136

IX. THE CENSORSHIP OF DREAMS

137

understood how to interpret it; for she said of it: ‘And disgust­
ing, stupid stuff like this was dreamt by a woman of fifty, who
has no other thoughts day and night but worry about her
child!’ 1

Here, then, is the dream—which deals with ‘love services’ in
war-time.12 ‘She went to Garrison Hospital Pio. i and informed the
sentry at the gate that she must speak to the Chief Medical Officer
(mentioning a name that was unknown to her) as she wanted to volunteer
for service at the hospital. She pronounced the word “service” in such a
way that the N.C.O. at once understood that she meant “love service”.
Since she was an elderly lady, after some hesitation he allowed her to
pass. Instead offinding the Chief Medical Officer, however, she reached
a large and gloomy apartment in which a number of officers and army
doctors were standing and sitting round a long table. She approached a
staff surgeon with her request, and he understood her meaning after she
had said only a few words. The actual wording of her speech in the
dream was: “I and many other women and girls in Vienna are ready
to . ..” at this point in the her dream words turned into a mumble “. . .
for the troops—officers and other ranks without distinction.” She could
tell from the expressions on the officers’ faces, partly embarrassed and
partly sly, that everyone had understood her meaning correctly. The lady
went on: “I’m aware that our decision must sound surprising, but we
mean it in bitter earnest. No one asks a soldier in the field whether he
wishes to die or not.” There followed an awkward silence of some
minutes. The staff surgeon then put his arm round her waist and said:
“Suppose, madam, it actually came to .. . (mumble).” She drew away
from him, thinking to herself: “He’s like all the rest of them”, and
replied: “Good gracious, I’m an old woman and I might never come to
that. Besides, there’s one condition that must be observed: age must be
respected. It must never happen that an elderly woman . . . (mumble)
. . . a mere boy. That would be terrible.” “I understand perfectly,”
replied the staff surgeon. Some of the officers, and among them one who
had been a suitor of hers in her youth, laughed out loud. The lady then
asked to be taken to the Chief Medical Officer, with whom she was
1 [This was during the 1914-18 War, in which one of her sons was
engaged on active service.]
2 Liebesdienste’ means in the first instance ‘services performed for
love’, i.e. ‘unremunerated services’; but it could bear another, less
respectable, meaning.]

138

DREAMS

acquainted, so that the whole matter could be thrashed out; but shefound,
to her consternation, that she could not recall his name. Nevertheless, the
staff surgeon, most politely and respectfully, showed her the way up to
the second floor by a very narrow, iron, spiral staircase, which led
directly from the room to the upper storeys of the building. As she went
up she heard an officer say: “That's a tremendous decision to make—no
matter whether a woman's young or old! Splendid of her!" Feeling
simply that she was doing her duty, she walked up an interminable
staircase.
‘The dream was repeated twice in the course of a few weeks,
with, as the lady remarked, some quite unimportant and mean­
ingless modifications.’1

From its continuous nature, the dream resembles a daytime
phantasy: there are few breaks in it, and some of the details of
its content could have been explained if they had been
enquired into, but that, as you know, was not done. But what
is remarkable and interesting from our point of view is that the
dream shows several gaps—gaps not in the dreamer’s memory
of the dream but in the content of the dream itself. At three
points the content was, as it were, extinguished; the speeches in
which these gaps occurred were interrupted by a mumble. As
no analysis was carried out, we have, strictly speaking, no right
to say anything about the sense of the dream. Nevertheless there
are hints on which conclusions can be based (for instance, in the
phrase ‘love services’); but above all, the portions of the
speeches immediately preceding the mumbles call for the gaps
to be filled in, and in an unambiguous manner. If we make the
insertions, the content of the phantasy turns out to be that the
dreamer is prepared, by way of fulfilling a patriotic duty, to
put herself at the disposal of the troops, both officers and other
ranks, for the satisfaction of their erotic needs. This is, of course,
highly objectionable, the model of a shameless libidinal phan­
tasy—but it does not appear in the dream at all. Precisely at the
points at which the context would call for this admission, the
manifest dream contains an indistinct mumble: something has
been lost or suppressed.
You will, I hope, think it plausible to suppose that it was
1 [This dream was later (in 1919) added as a footnote to I. of D., 4,
142-4.]

IX. THE CENSORSHIP OF DREAMS

139

precisely the objectionable nature of these passages that was the
motive for their suppression. Where shall we find a parallel to
such an event? You need not look far in these days. Take up any
political newspaper and you will find that here and there the
text is absent and in its place nothing except the white paper
is to be seen. This, as you know, is the work of the press censor­
ship. In these empty places there was something that displeased
the higher censorship authorities and for that reason it was
removed—a pity, you feel, since no doubt it was the most
interesting thing in the paper—the ‘best bit’.
On other occasions the censorship has not gone to work on a
passage after it has already been completed. The author has
seen in advance which passages might expect to give rise to
objections from the censorship and has on that account toned
them down in advance, modified them slightly, or has contented
himself with approximations and allusions to what would
genuinely have come from his pen. In that case there are no
blank places in the paper, but circumlocutions and obscurities
of expression appearing at certain points will enable you to
guess where regard has been paid to the censorship in advance.
Well, we can keep close to this parallel. It is our view that the
omitted pieces of the speeches in the dream which were con­
cealed by a mumble have likewise been sacrificed to a censor­
ship. We speak in so many words of a ‘dream-censorship’, to which
some share in dream-distortion is to be attributed. Wherever
there are gaps in the manifest dream the dream-censorship is
responsible for them. We should go further, and regard it as a
manifestation of the censorship wherever a dream-element is
remembered especially faintly, indefinitely and doubtfully
among other elements that are more clearly constructed. But it
is only rarely that this censorship manifests itself so undisguisedly—so naively, one might say—as in this example o
the dream of ‘love services’. The censorship takes effect much
more frequently according to the second method, by producing
softenings, approximations and allusions instead of the genuine
thing.
'
I know of no parallel in the operations of the press-censorship
to a third manner of working by the dream-censorship; but I
am able to demonstrate it from precisely the one example of a
dream which we have analysed so far. You will recall the dream
S.F. XV—K

140

DREAMS

of the ‘three bad theatre-tickets for 1 florin 50’ [p. 122]. In the
latent thoughts of that dream the element ‘over-hurriedly, too
early’ stood in the foreground. Thus: it was absurd to marry so
early—it was also absurd to take the theatre-tickets so early—
it was ridiculous of the sister-in-law to part with her money in
such a hurry to buy jewellery with it. Nothing of this central
element of the dream-thoughts passed over into the manifest
dream; in it the central position is taken by the ‘going to the
theatre’ and ‘taking the tickets’. As a result of this displace­
ment of accent, this fresh grouping of the elements of the con­
tent, the manifest dream has become so unlike the latent dream­
thoughts that no-one would suspect the presence of the latter
behind the former. This displacement of accent is one of the
chief instruments of dream-distortion and it is what gives the
dream the strangeness on account of which the dreamer him­
self is not inclined to recognize it as his own production.
Omission, modification, fresh grouping of the material—
these, then, are the activities of the dream-censorship and the
instruments of dream-distortion. The dream-censorship itself is
the originator, or one of the originators, of the dream-distortion
which we are now engaged in examining. We are in the habit
of combining the concepts of modification and re-arrangement
under the term ‘displacement’.
After these remarks on the activities of the dream-censorship,
we will now turn to its dynamics. I hope you do not take the
term too anthropomorphically, and do not picture the ‘censor
of dreams’ as a severe little manikin or a spirit living in a closet
in the brain and there discharging his office; but I hope too
that you do not take the term in too ‘localizing’ a sense, and do
not think of a ‘brain-centre’, from which a censoring influence
of this kind issues, an influence which would be brought to an
end if the ‘centre’ were damaged or removed. For the time being
it is nothing more than a serviceable term for describing a
dynamic relation. The word does not prevent our asking by
what purposes1 this influence is exercised and against what pur­
poses it is directed. And we shall not be surprised to learn that
we have come up against the dream-censorship once already,
though perhaps without recognizing it.
1 [Or, here and in what follows, ‘trends’. Cf. footnote 1, p. 40 above.]

IX. THE CENSORSHIP OF DREAMS

141

For that is in fact the case. You will recall that when we
began to make use of our technique of free association we made
a surprising discovery. We became aware that our efforts at
proceeding from the dream-element to the unconscious element
for which it is a substitute were being met by a resistance
[p. 116]. This resistance, we said, could be of different magni­
tudes, sometimes enormous and sometimes quite insignificant.
In the latter case we need to pass through only a small number
of intermediate links in our work of interpretation; but when
the resistance is large we have to traverse long chains of associa­
tions from the dream-element, we are led far away from it and
on our path we have to overcome all the difficulties which
represent themselves as critical objections to the ideas that
occur. What we met with as resistance in our work of inter­
pretation must now be introduced into the dream-work in the
form of the dream-censorship. The resistance to interpretation
is only a putting into effect1 of the dream-censorship. It also
proves to us that the force of the censorship is not exhausted in
bringing about the distortion of dreams and thereafter extin­
guished, but that the censorship persists as a permanent institu­
tion which has as its aim the maintenance of the distortion.
Moreover, just as the strength of the resistance varies in the
interpretation of each element in a dream, so too the magnitude
of the distortion introduced by the censorship varies for each
element in the same dream. If we compare the manifest and the
latent dream, we shall find that some particular latent elements
have been completely eliminated, others modified to a greater
or less extent, while yet others have been carried over into the
manifest content of the dream unaltered or even perhaps
strengthened.
But we wanted to enquire what are the purposes which
exercise the censorship and against what purposes it is directed.
Now this question, which is fundamental for the understanding
of dreams and perhaps, indeed, of human life, is easy to answer

1 [‘Objektwierung.’ Literally, ‘making objective’. The term is used
several times in an early paper of Freud’s on hypnotic treatment (1892­
93) and again in Studies on Hysteria (1895rf), Standard Ed., 2,92-3. Freud
himself seems to use the term ‘Realisierung (realization)’ as a synonym.
See Freud (1897i), ibid., 3, 243.]

142

DREAMS

if we look through the series of dreams which have been inter­
preted. The purposes which exercise the censorship are those
which are acknowledged by the dreamer’s waking judgement,
those with which he feels himself at one. You may be sure that
if you reject an interpretation of one of your own dreams which
has been correctly carried out, you are doing so for the same
motives for which the dream-censorship has been exercised, the
dream-distortion brought about and the interpretation made
necessary. Take the dream of our fifty-year-old lady [p. 137].
She thought her dream disgusting without having analysed it,
and she would have been still more indignant if Dr. von HugHellmuth had told her anything of its inevitable interpretation;
it was precisely because of this condemnation by the dreamer
that the objectionable passages in her dream were replaced by
a mumble.
The purposes against which the dream-censorship is directedmust be described in the first instance from the point of view of
that agency itself. If so, one can only say that they are invari­
ably of a reprehensible nature, repulsive from the ethical,
aesthetic and social point of view—matters of which one does
not venture to think at all or thinks only with disgust. These
wishes, which are censored and given a distorted expression in
dreams, are first and foremost manifestations of an unbridled
and ruthless egoism. And, to be sure, the dreamer’s own ego
appears in every dream and plays the chief part in it, even if
it knows quite well how to hide itself so far as the manifest
content goes. This ‘sacra egoismo’ of dreams is certainly not un­
related to the attitude we adopt when we sleep, which con­
sists in our withdrawing our interest from the whole external
world.1
The ego, freed from all ethical bonds, also finds itself at one
with all the demands of sexual desire, even those which have
long been condemned by our aesthetic upbringing and those
which contradict all the requirements of moral restraint. The
desire for pleasure—the ‘libido’, as we call it—chooses its objects
without inhibition, and by preference, indeed, the forbidden
ones: not only other men’s wives, but above all incestuous
objects, objects sanctified by the common agreement of man-'
1 [In a footnote added to I. ofD., 4,270 n., in 1925, Freud made some
qualification of his statement that dreams are entirely egoistic.]

IX. THE CENSORSHIP OF DREAMS

143

kind, a man’s mother and sister, a woman’s father and brother.
(The dream of our fifty-year-old lady, too, was incestuous; her
libido was unmistakably directed to her son. [Cf. footnote 1,
p. 137.]) Lusts which we think of as remote from human nature
show themselves strong enough to provoke dreams. Hatred, too,
rages without restraint. Wishes for revenge and death directed
against those who are nearest and dearest in waking life, against
the dreamer’s parents, brothers and sisters, husband or wife,
and his own children are nothing unusual. These censored
wishes appear to rise up out of a positive Hell; after they have
been interpreted when we are awake, no censorship of them
seems to us too severe.
But you must not blame the dream itself on account of its
evil content. Do not forget that it performs the innocent and
indeed useful function of preserving sleep from disturbance.
This wickedness is not part of the essential nature of dreams.
Indeed you know too that there are dreams which can be
recognized as the satisfaction ofjustified wishes and of pressing
bodily needs. These, it is true, have no dream-distortion; but
they have no need of it, for they can fulfil their function without
insulting the ethical and aesthetic purposes1 of the ego. Bear
in mind, too, that dream-distortion is proportionate to two
factors. On the one hand it becomes greater the worse the wish
that has to be censored; but on the other hand it also becomes
greater the more severe the demands of the censorship at the
moment. Thus a strictly brought-up and prudish young girl,
with a relentless censorship, will distort dream-impulses which
we doctors, for instance, would have to regard as permissible,
harmless, libidinal wishes, and on which in ten years’ time the
dreamer herself will make the same judgement.
Furthermore, we have not got nearly far enough yet to be
able to feel indignant at this result of our work of interpretation.
We do not yet, I think, understand it properly; but our first
duty is to defend it against certain aspersions. There is no
difficulty in finding a weak point in it. Our dream-interpreta­
tions are made on the basis of the premisses which we have
already accepted [p. 100 f.]—that dreams in general have a
sense, that it is legitimate to carry across from hypnotic to
normal sleep the fact of the existence of mental processes which
1 [See footnote, p. 140 above.]

144

DREAMS

are at the time unconscious, and that everything that occurs to
the mind is determined. If on the basis of these premisses we had
arrived at plausible findings from dream-interpretation, we
should have been justified in concluding that the premisses
were valid. But how about it if these findings seem to be as I
have pictured them? We should then be tempted to say: ‘These
are impossible, senseless or at the least most improbable find­
ings; so there was something wrong about the premisses. Either
dreams are not psychical phenomena, or there is nothing
unconscious in the normal state, or our technique has a flaw in
it. Is it not simpler and more satisfactory to suppose this rather
than accept all the abominations which we are supposed to
have discovered on the basis of our premisses?’
Yes, indeed! Both simpler and more satisfactory—but not
necessarily on that account more correct. Let us give ourselves
time: the matter is not yet ripe for judgement. And first, we can
further strengthen the criticism of our dream-interpretations.
The fact that the findings from them are so disagreeable and
repellent need not, perhaps, carry very great weight. A stronger
argument is that the dreamers to whom we are led to attribute
such wishful purposes by the interpretation of their dreams
reject them most emphatically and for good reasons. ‘What?’
says one of them, ‘you want to convince me from this dream
that I regret the money I have spent on my sister’s dowry and
my brother’s education? But that cannot be so. I work entirely
for my brothers and sisters; I have no other interest in life but
to fulfil my duties to them, which, as the eldest of the family,
I promised our departed mother I would do.’ Or a woman
dreamer would say: ‘You think I wish my husband was dead?
That is a shocking piece of nonsense! It is not only that we are
most happily married—you would probably not believe me if
I said that—but his death would rob me of everything I possess
in the world.’ Or another man would answer us: ‘You say that
I have sensual desires for my sister? That is ridiculous! She
means nothing at all to me. We are on bad terms with each
other and I have not exchanged a word with her for years.’ We
might still take it lightly, perhaps, if these dreamers neither
confirmed nor denied the purposes we attribute to them; we
might say that these were just things they did not know about
themselves. But when they feel in themselves the precise con­

IX. THE CENSORSHIP OF DREAMS

145

trary of the wish we have interpreted to them and when they
are able to prove to us by the lives they lead that they are
dominated by this contrary wish, it must surely take us aback.
Has not the time come to throw aside the whole work we have
done on dream-interpretation as something which its findings
have reduced ad absurduni?
No, not even now. Even this stronger argument collapses if
we examine it critically. Granted that there are unconscious
purposes in mental life, nothing is proved by showing that
purposes opposed to these are dominant in conscious life.
Perhaps there is room in the mind for contrary purposes, for
contradictions, to exist side by side. Possibly, indeed, the
dominance of one impulse is precisely a necessary condition of
its contrary being unconscious. We are after all left, then, with
the first objections that were raised: the findings of dream­
interpretation are not simple and they are very disagreeable.
We may reply to the first that all your passion for what is
simple will not be able to solve a single one of the problems of
dreams. You must get accustomed here to assuming a com­
plicated state of affairs. And we may reply to the second that
you are plainly wrong to use a liking or disliking that you may
feel as the ground for a scientific judgement. What difference
does it make if the findings of dream-interpretation seem dis­
agreeable to you or, indeed, embarrassing and repulsive? ‘Qa
riempeche pas d’existed, as I heard my teacher Charcot say in a
similar case when I was a young doctor.1 One must be humble
and hold back one’s sympathies and antipathies if one wants to
discover what is real in this world. If a physicist were able to
prove to you that in a short period organic life on this earth
would be brought to an end by freezing, would you venture to
make the same reply to him: ‘That cannot be so, the prospect
is too disagreeable’? You would, I think, be silent, until another
physicist came and pointed out to the first one an error in his
premisses or calculations. When you reject something that
is disagreeable to you, what you are doing is repeating the
1 [Charcot’s remark in full was: ‘La throne, c’est bon, mais ?a
n’empeche pas d’exister.’ (‘Theory is good; but it doesn’t prevent things
from existing.’) A favourite quotation of Freud’s. See his obituary of
Charcot (1893/), Standard Ed., 3, 13, where the circumstances are
described.]

146

DREAMS

mechanism of constructing dreams rather than understanding
it and surmounting it.
You will promise now, perhaps, to disregard the repellent
character of the censored dream-wishes and will withdraw
upon the argument that after all it is unlikely that such a large
space should be given to the evil in the constitution of human
beings. But do your own experiences justify your saying this?
I will not discuss how you may appear to yourselves; but have
you found so much benevolence among your superiors and
competitors, so much chivalry among your enemies and so little
envy in your social surroundings that you feel it your duty
to protest against egoistic evil having a share in human nature?
Are you not aware of how uncontrolled and untrustworthy the
average person is in everything to do with sexual life? Or do you
not know that all the transgressions and excesses of which we
dream at night are daily committed in real life by waking men?
What does psycho-analysis do here but confirm Plato’s old say­
ing that the good are those who are content to dream of what
the others, the bad, really do?1
And now turn your eyes away from individuals and consider
the Great War which is still laying Europe waste. Think of the
vast amount of brutality, cruelty and lies which are able to
spread over the civilized world. Do you really believe that a
handful of ambitious and deluding men without conscience
could have succeeded in unleashing all these evil spirits if their
millions of followers did not share their guilt? Do you venture,
in such circumstances, to break a lance on behalf of the
exclusion of evil from the mental constitution of mankind?1
2
You will represent to me that I am giving a one-sided judge­
ment on the War: that it has also brought to light what is finest
and noblest in men, their heroism, their self-sacrifice, their social
sense. No doubt; but are you not now showing yourselves as
accessories to the injustice that has so often been done to psycho­
analysis in reproaching it with denying one thing because it has
asserted another? It is not our intention to dispute the noble
endeavours of human nature, nor have we ever done anything
1 [Quoted in I. of D., 4, 67.]
2 [Freud’s strongest impeachment of the destructive side of human
nature was made in Chapters V and VI of Civilization and its Discontents
(1930a).]

IX. THE CENSORSHIP OF DREAMS

147

to detract from their value. On the contrary; I am exhibiting
to you not only the evil dream-wishes which are censored but
also the censorship, which suppresses them and makes them
unrecognizable. We lay a stronger emphasis on what is evil in
men only because other people disavow it and thereby make the
human mind, not better, but incomprehensible. If now we give
up this one-sided ethical valuation, we shall undoubtedly find
a more correct formula for the relation between good and evil
in human nature.
There it is, then. We need not give up the findings of our
work on the interpretation of dreams even though we cannot
but regard them as strange. Perhaps we shall be able to
approach an understanding of them later from another direc­
tion. For the time being let us hold fast to this: dream-distortion
is a result of the censorship which is exercised by recognized
purposes of the ego against wishful impulses in any way objec­
tionable that stir within us at night-time during our sleep. Why
this should happen particularly at night-time and where these
reprehensible wishes come from—these are matters on which,
no doubt, much still remains for questioning and research.

But it would be unfair if we neglected at this point to
emphasize sufficiently another outcome of our investigations.
The dream-wishes which seek to disturb us in our sleep are
unknown to us and indeed we only learnt of them through
dream-interpretation. They are thus to be described, in the
sense we have discussed, as unconscious for the time being. But
we must reflect that they are unconscious too for more than the
time being. The dreamer also disavows them, as we have seen
in so many instances, after he has come to know them through
the interpretation of his dream. We are then faced once again
with the position we first came across in the ‘hiccoughing’ slip
of the tongue [p. 49], where the proposer of the toast protested
indignantly that neither then nor at any earlier time had he
become conscious of any disrespectful impulse towards his
Chief. Already at the time we felt some doubts about the weight
of an assurance of this kind, and suggested instead the hypo­
thesis that the speaker was permanently unaware of the presence
of this impulse in him. This situation is repeated now with every
interpretation of a strongly distorted dream and consequently

148

DREAMS

gains an increased importance in its bearing on the view we
have taken. We are now prepared to assume that there are in
the mind processes and purposes of which one knows nothing
at all, has known nothing for a long time, and has even perhaps
never known anything. With this the unconscious acquires a
new sense for us; the characteristic of ‘for the time being’ or
‘temporary’ disappears from its essential nature. It can mean
permanently unconscious and not merely ‘latent at the time’.
We shall of course have to hear more about this on some other
occasion.

LECTURE X

SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS1
Ladies and Gentlemen,—We have found that the distortion
in dreams, which interferes with our understanding of them, is
the result of a censoring activity which is directed against un­
acceptable, unconscious wishful impulses. We have not, of
course, maintained that the censorship is the sole factor respon­
sible for the distortion in dreams, and in fact when we study
them further we can discover that other factors play a part in
producing this result. This amounts to our saying that even if
the dream-censorship was out of action we should still not be
in a position to understand dreams, the manifest dream would
still not be identical with the latent dream-thoughts.
We come upon this other factor which prevents dreams from
being lucid, this new contribution to dream-distortion, by
noticing a gap in our technique. I have already admitted to
you [p. 105] that it does sometimes really happen that nothing
occurs to a person under analysis in response to particular
elements of his dreams. It is true that this does not happen as
often as he asserts; in a great many cases, with perseverance,
an idea is extracted from him. But nevertheless there remain
cases in which an association fails to emerge or, if it is extracted,
does not give us what we expected from it. If this happens
during a psycho-analytic treatment, it has a peculiar signifi­
cance with which we are not here concerned.2 But it also
1 [As Freud tells us (/. of D., 5, 350), it was relatively late before he
realized the full importance of dream-symbolism, largely under the
influence of Wilhelm Stekel (1911). It was not until the fourth (1914)
edition of The Interpretation of Dreams that a special section was devoted
to the subject. That section (Chapter VI, Section E) represents, apart
from the present lecture, Freud’s main discussion of symbolism. The
topic appears, of course, in many other places both in The Interpretation
of Dreams and in other works throughout Freud’s life, and references to
these will be found at a few points below. It may be added, however,
that the present lecture has claims to being regarded as the most
important of all Freud’s writings on symbolism.]
2 [The reference here is to the blocking of free associations by uncon­
scious stirring-up of the transference. Cf. ‘The Dynamics of Trans­
ference’, 19124, Standard Ed., 12,103 ff. See also Lecture XXVII below].
149

150

DREAMS

happens in the interpretation of normal people’s dreams or in
that of our own. If we convince ourselves that in such cases no
amount of pressure is of any use, we eventually discover that
this unwished-for event regularly occurs in connection with
particular dream-elements, and we begin to recognize that a
fresh general principle is at work where we had begun by
thinking we were only faced by an exceptional failure of
technique.
In this way we are tempted to interpret these ‘mute’ dream­
elements ourselves, to set about translating them with our own
resources. We are then forced to recognize that whenever we
venture on making a replacement of this sort we arrive at a
satisfactory sense for the dream, whereas it remains senseless
and the chain of thought is interrupted so long as we refrain
from intervening in this way. An accumulation of many
similar cases eventually gives the necessary certainty to what
began as a timid experiment.
I am putting all this in a rather schematic way; but that is
permissible, after all, for didactic purposes, nor has it been
falsified, but merely simplified.
In this way we obtain constant translations for a number of
dream-elements—-just as popular ‘dream-books’ provide them
for everything that appears in dreams. You will not have for­
gotten, of course, that when we use our associative technique
constant replacements of dream-elements never come to light.
You will object at once that this method of interpretation
strikes you as far more insecure and open to attack than the
earlier one by means of free association. There is, however,
something further. For when, with experience, we have col­
lected enough of these constant renderings, the time comes
when we realize that we should in fact have been able to deal
with these portions of dream-interpretation from our own
knowledge, and that they could really be understood without
the dreamer’s associations. How it is that we must necessarily
have known their meaning will become clear in the second half
of our present discussion.
A constant relation of this kind between a dream-element
and its translation is described by us as a ‘symbolic’ one, and
the dream-element itself as a ‘symbol’ of the unconscious
dream-thought. You will recall that earlier, when we were

X. SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS

151

investigating the relations between dream-elements and the
‘genuine’ thing behind them, I distinguished three such rela­
tions—those of a part to a whole, of allusion and of plastic
portrayal. I warned you at the time that there was a fourth, but
I did not name it [p. 122]. This fourth relation is the symbolic
one which I am now introducing. It gives occasion for some
most interesting discussions, and I will turn to them before
laying before you the detailed results of our observations of
symbolism.
•
Symbolism is perhaps the most remarkable chapter of the
theory of dreams. In the first place, since symbols are stable
translations, they realize to some extent the ideal of the ancient
as well as of the popular interpretation of dreams, from which,
with our technique, we had departed widely. They allow us in
certain circumstances to interpret a dream without questioning
the dreamer, who indeed would in any case have nothing to tell
us about the symbol. If we are acquainted with the ordinary
dream-symbols, and in addition with the dreamer’s personality,
the circumstances in which he lives and the impressions which
preceded the occurrence of the dream, we are often in a position
to interpret a dream straightaway—to translate it at sight, as
it were. A piece of virtuosity of this kind flatters the dream­
interpreter and impresses the dreamer; it forms an agreeable
contrast to the laborious work of questioning the dreamer. But
do not allow yourselves to be led astray by this. It is not our
business to perform acts of virtuosity. Interpretation based on
a knowledge of symbols is not a technique which can replace
or compete with the associative one. It forms a supplement to
the latter and yields results which are only of use when intro­
duced into it. And as regards acquaintance with the dreamer’s
psychical situation, you must bear in mind that the dreams of
people you know well are not the only ones you have to analyse,
that you are not as a rule familiar with the events of the pre­
vious day, which were the instigators of the dream, but that the
associations of the person you are analysing will provide you
precisely with a knowledge of what we call the psychical
situation.
Moreover it is quite specially remarkable—having regard,
too, to some considerations which we shall mention later

152

DREAMS

[cf. p. 169]—that the most violent resistances have been ex­
pressed once again to the existence of a symbolic relation
between dreams and the unconscious. Even people of judge­
ment and reputation, who, apart from this, have gone a long
way in agreeing with psycho-analysis, have at this point withheld
their support. This behaviour is all the stranger in view, first,
of the fact that symbolism is not peculiar to dreams alone and
is not characteristic of them, and, secondly, that symbolism in
dreams is by no means a discovery of psycho-analysis, however
many other surprising discoveries it has made. The philosopher
K. A. Schemer (1861) must be described as the discoverer of
dream-symbolism, if its beginning is to be placed in modern
times at all. Psycho-analysis has confirmed Schemer’s findings,
though it has made material modifications in them.
You will now want to hear something of the nature of dream­
symbolism and to be given some examples of it. I will gladly tell
you what I know, though I must confess that our understanding
of it does not go as far as we should like.
The essence of this symbolic relation is that it is a comparison,
though not a comparison of any sort. Special limitations seem
to be attached to the comparison, but it is hard to say what
these are. Not everything with which we can compare an
object or a process appears in dreams as a symbol for it. And on
the other hand a dream does not symbolize every possible
element of the latent dream-thoughts but only certain definite
ones. So there are restrictions here in both directions. We must
admit, too, that the concept of a symbol cannot at present be
sharply delimited: it shades off into such notions as those of a
replacement or representation, and even approaches that of an
allusion. With a number of symbols the comparison which
underlies them is obvious. But again there are other symbols in
regard to which we must ask ourselves where we are to look
for the common element, the tertium comparationis, of the sup­
posed comparison. On further reflection we may afterwards
discover it or it may definitely remain concealed. It is strange,
moreover, that if a symbol is a comparison it should not be
brought to light by an association, and that the dreamer should
not be acquainted with it but should make use of it without
knowing about it: more than that, indeed, that the dreamer
feels no inclination to acknowledge the comparison even after

X. SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS

153

it has been pointed out to him. You see, then, that a symbolic
relation is a comparison of a quite special kind, of which we do
not as yet clearly grasp the basis, though perhaps we may later
arrive at some indication of it.

The range of things which are given symbolic representation
in dreams is not wide: the human body as a whole, parents,
children, brothers and sisters, birth, death, nakedness—and
something else besides. The one typical—that is regular—
representation of the human figure as a whole is a house, as was
recognized by Schemer, who even wanted to give this symbol a
transcendant importance which it does not possess. It may
happen in a dream that one finds oneself climbing down the
facade of a house, enjoying it at one moment, frightened at
another. The houses with smooth walls are men, the ones with
projections and balconies that one can hold on to are women
[cf. p. 159 below]. One’s parents appear in dreams as the
Emperor and Empress, the King and Queen [loc. cit.] or other
honoured personages; so here dreams are displaying much
filial piety. They treat children and brothers and sisters less
tenderly: these are symbolized as small animals or vermin. Birth
is almost invariably represented by something which has a
connection with water, one either falls into the water or climbs
out of it, one rescues someone from the water or is rescued by
someone—that is to say, the relation is one of mother to child
[cf. p. 160], Dying is replaced in dreams by departure, by a
train journey [cf. p. 161], being dead by various obscure and,
as it were, timid hints, nakedness by clothes and uniforms. You
see how indistinct the boundaries are here between symbolic
and allusive representation.
It is a striking fact that, compared with this scanty enumera­
tion, there is another field in which the objects and topics are
represented with an extraordinarily rich symbolism. This field
is that of sexual life—the genitals, sexual processes, sexual
intercourse. The very great majority of symbols in dreams are
sexual symbols. And here a strange disproportion is revealed.
The topics I have mentioned are few, but the symbols for them
are extremely numerous, so that each of these things can be
expressed by numbers of almost equivalent symbols. The out­
come, when they are interpreted, gives rise to general objection.

154

DREAMS

For, in contrast to the multiplicity of the representations in the
dream, the interpretations of the symbols are very monotonous,
and this displeases everyone who hears of it; but what is there
that we can do about it?

Since this is the first time I have spoken of the subject-matter
of sexual life in one of these lectures, I owe you some account
of the way in which I propose to treat the topic. Psycho-analysis
finds no occasion for concealments and hints, it does not think
it necessary to be ashamed of dealing with this important
material, it believes it is right and proper to call everything by
its correct name, and it hopes that this will be the best way of
keeping irrelevant thoughts of a disturbing kind at a distance.
The fact that these lectures are being given before a mixed
audience of both sexes can make no difference to this. Just as
there can be no science in usum Delphini,1 there can be none for
schoolgirls; and the ladies among you have made it clear by
their presence in this lecture-room that they wish to be treated
on an equality with men.
The male genitals, then, are represented in dreams in a
number of ways that must be called symbolic, where the com­
mon element in the comparison is mostly very obvious. To
begin with, for the male genitals as a whole the sacred number
3 is of symbolic significance [cf. p. 163 f.]. The more striking and
for both sexes the more interesting component of the genitals,
the male organ, finds symbolic substitutes in the first instance
in things that resemble it in shape—things, accordingly, that
are long and up-standing, such as sticks, umbrellas, posts, trees and
so on; further, in objects which share with the thing they rep­
resent the characteristic of penetrating into the body and
injuring—thus, sharp weapons of every kind, knives, daggers,
spears, sabres, but also fire-arms, rifles, pistols and revolvers (par­
ticularly suitable owing to their shape). In the anxiety dreams
of girls, being followed by a man with a knife or a fire-arm plays
a large part. This is perhaps the commonest instance of dream­
symbolism and you will now be able to translate it easily. Nor
is there any difficulty in understanding how it is that the male
organ can be replaced by objects from which water flows—
1 [Cf. footnote 2, p. 102.]

X. SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS

155

water-taps, watering-cans, or fountains—or again by other objects
which are capable of being lengthened, such as hanging-lamps,
extensible pencils, etc. A no less obvious aspect of the organ
explains the fact that pencils, pen-holders, nail-files, hammers, and
other instruments are undoubted male sexual symbols.
The remarkable characteristic of the male organ which
enables it to rise up in defiance of the laws of gravity, one of the
phenomena of erection, leads to its being represented sym­
bolically by balloons, flying-machines and most recently by £eppelin airships. But dreams can symbolize erection in yet another,
far more expressive manner. They can treat the sexual organ as
the essence of the dreamer’s whole person and make him himself
fly. Do not take it to heart if dreams of flying, so familiar and
often so delightful, have to be interpreted as dreams of general
sexual excitement, as erection-dreams. Among students of
psycho-analysis, Paul Federn [1914] has placed this interpreta­
tion beyond any doubt; but the same conclusion was reached
from his investigations by Mourly Void [1910-12, 2, 791], who
has been so much praised for his sobriety, who carried out the
dream-experiments I have referred to [p. 87] with artificially
arranged positions of the arms and legs and who was far re­
moved from psycho-analysis and may have known nothing
about it. And do not make an objection out of the fact that
women can have the same flying dreams as men. Remember,
rather, that our dreams aim at being the fulfilments of wishes
and that the wish to be a man is found so frequently, con­
sciously or unconsciously, in women. Nor will anyone with a
knowledge of anatomy be bewildered by the fact that it is
possible for women to realize this wish through the same sensa­
tions as men. Women possess as part of their genitals a small
organ similar to the male one; and this small organ, the
clitoris, actually plays the same part in childhood and during
the years before sexual intercourse as the large organ in men.1
Among the less easily understandable male sexual symbols
are certain reptiles and fishes, and above all the famous symbol
of the snake. It is certainly not easy to guess why hats and
overcoats or cloaks are employed in the same way, but their
symbolic significance is quite unquestionable [cf. p. 157]. And
finally we can ask ourselves whether the replacement of the
.
1 [This is further discussed on p. 318 below.]
S.F. XV—L

156

DREAMS

male limb by another limb, the foot or the hand, should be
described as symbolic. We are, I think, compelled to do so by
the context and by counterparts in the case of women.
The female genitals are symbolically represented by all such
objects as share their characteristic of enclosing a hollow space
which can take something into itself: by/>tfe, cavities and hollows,
for instance, by vessels and bottles, by receptacles, boxes, trunks,
cases, chests, pockets, and so on. Ships, too, fall into this category.
Some symbols have more connection with the uterus than with
the female genitals: thus, cupboards, stoves and, more especially,
rooms. Here room-symbolism touches on house-symbolism.
Doors and gates, again, are symbols of the genital orifice.
Materials, too, are symbols for women [cf. p. 160]: wood,
paper and objects made of them, like tables and books. Among
animals, snails and mussels at least are undeniably female
symbols; among parts of the body, the mouth (as a substitute for
the genital orifice); among buildings, churches and chapels. Not
every symbol, as you will observe, is equally intelligible.
The breasts must be reckoned with the genitals, and these,
like the larger hemispheres of the female body, are represented
by apples, peaches, and fruit in general. The pubic hair of both
sexes is depicted in dreams as woods and bushes. The complicated
topography of the female genital parts makes one understand
how it is that they are often represented as landscapes, with rocks,
woods and water,1 while the imposing mechanism of the male
sexual apparatus explains why all kinds of complicated mach­
inery which is hard to describe serve as symbols for it.
Another symbol of the female genitals which deserves men­
tion is a jewel-case.2 Jewel and treasure are used in dreams as well
as in waking life to describe someone who is loved. Sweets
frequently represent sexual enjoyment. Satisfaction obtained
from a person’s own genitals is indicated by all kinds ofplaying,
including piano-playing. Symbolic representations par excellence
of masturbation are gliding or sliding and pulling off a branch
[cf. p. 164]. The falling out of a tooth or the pulling out of a tooth
is a particularly notable dream-symbol. Its first meaning is
1 [A dream with a quantity of landscape symbolism is reported below,
p. 193.]
a [This played a prominent part in the analysis of the first dream in
the case history of ‘Dora’ (1905«), Standard Ed., 7, 64 ff.]

X. SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS

157

undoubtedly castration as a punishment for masturbating
[loc. cit.]. We come across special representations of sexual
intercourse less often than might be expected from what has
been said so far. Rhythmical activities such as dancing, riding
and climbing must be mentioned here, as well as violent ex­
periences such as being run over; so, too, certain manual crafts, and,
of course, threatening with weapons.
You must not picture the use or the translation of these
symbols as something quite simple. In the course of them all
kinds of things happen which are contrary to our expectations.
It seems almost incredible, for instance, that in these symbolic
representations the differences between the sexes are often not
clearly observed. Some symbols signify genitals in general,
irrespective of whether they are male or female: for instance,
a small child, a small son or a small daughter.1 Or again, a pre­
dominantly male symbol may be used for the female genitals
or vice versa. We cannot understand this till we have obtained
some insight into the development of sexual ideas in human
beings. In some instances the ambiguity of the symbols may
only be an apparent one; and the most marked symbols, such
as weapons, pockets and chests are excluded from this bisexual use.
I will now go on to make a survey, starting not from the thing
represented but from the symbol, of the fields from which sexual
symbols are mostly derived, and I will make a few additional
remarks, with special reference to the symbols where the
common element in the comparison is not understood. The hat
is an obscure symbol of this kind—perhaps, too, head-coverings
in general—with a male significance as a rule, but also capable
of a female one.I2 In the same way an overcoat or cloak means a
man, perhaps not always with a genital reference; it is open to
you to ask why.3 Neckties, which hang down and are not worn
1 [That is, any one of these three may be used in a dream as a symbol
for either the male or the female genitals.]
2 [Hat-symbolism was discussed by Freud in his short paper ‘A
Connection between a Symbol and a Symptom’ (1916c), Standard Ed.,
14,339-40.]
.
8 [In I. of D., 5, 356, Freud suggests that the explanation may be a
verbal assonance between ‘Mann' and ‘Mantel’ (the German for ‘over­
coat’ or ‘cloak’). A further discussion of this symbol occurs in Lecture
XXIX of the New Introductory Lectures (1933a), ibid., 22, 24.]

158

DREAMS

by women, are a definitely male symbol. Underclothing and linen
in general are female. Clothes and uniforms, as we have already
seen, are a substitute for nakedness or bodily shapes. Shoes and
slippers are female genitals. Tables and wood have already been
mentioned as puzzling but certainly female symbols. Ladders,
steps and staircases, or, more precisely, walking on them, are
clear symbols of sexual intercourse. On reflection, it will occur
to us that the common element here is the rhythm of walking up
them—perhaps, too, the increasing excitement and breath­
lessness the higher one climbs [cf. p. 164].
We have earlier referred to landscapes as representing the
female genitals. Hills and rocks are symbols of the male organ.
Gardens are common symbols of the female genitals. Fruit
stands, not for children, but for the breasts. Wild animals mean
people in an excited sensual state, and further, evil instincts or
passions. Blossoms and flowers indicate women’s genitals, or, in
particular, virginity. Do not forget that blossoms are actually
the genitals of plants.1
We are acquainted already with rooms as a symbol. The rep­
resentation can be carried further, for windows, and doors in
and out of rooms, take over the meaning of orifices in the body.
And the question of the room being open or locked fits in with
this symbolism, and the key that opens it is a decidedly male
symbol.

Here, then, is material used for symbolism in dreams. It
is not complete and could be carried deeper as well as further.
But I fancy it will seem to you more than enough and may even
have exasperated you. ‘Do I really live in the thick of sexual
symbols?’ you may ask. ‘Are all the objects around me, all the
clothes I put on, all the things I pick up, all of them sexual
symbols and nothing else?’ There is really ground enough for
raising astonished questions, and, as a first one, we may enquire
how we in fact come to know the meaning of these dream­
symbols, upon which the dreamer himself gives us insufficient
information or none at all.
My reply is that we learn it from very different sources—
from fairy tales and myths, from buffoonery and jokes, from
1 [A dream with a large amount of flower symbolism is reported in

I. of D., 4, 319 and 5, 347-8.]

X. SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS

159

folklore (that is, from knowledge about popular manners and
customs, sayings and songs) and from poetic and colloquial
linguistic usage. In all these directions we come upon the same
symbolism, and in some of them we can understand it without
further instruction. If we go into these sources in detail, we
shall find so many parallels to dream-symbolism that we cannot
fail to be convinced of our interpretations.
According to Schemer, as we have said [p. 153], the human
body is often represented in dreams by the symbol of a house.
Carrying this representation further, we found that windows,
doors and gates stood for openings in the body and that facades
of houses were either smooth or provided with balconies and
projections to hold on to. But the same symbolism is found in
our linguistic usage—when we greet an acquaintance familiarly
as an 'altes Haus’ [‘old house’], when we speak of giving someone
'eins aufs Dachl’ [a knock on the head, literally, ‘one on the
roof’], or when we say of someone else that ‘he’s not quite
right in the upper storey’. In anatomy the orifices of the body
are in so many words termed ‘Leibespforteri [literally, ‘portals of
the body’].
It seems surprising at first to find one’s parents in dreams as
an imperial or royal couple. But it has its parallel in fairy tales.
It begins to dawn on us that the many fairy tales which begin
‘Once upon a time there were a King and Queen’ only mean
to say that there were once a father and mother. In a family
the children are jokingly called ‘princes’ and the eldest ‘crown
prince’. The King himself calls himself the father of his country.
We speak of small children jokingly as 'Warmer’ [‘worms’] and
speak sympathetically of a child as ‘der arme Wurm’ [‘the poor
worm’].
Let us go back to house-symbolism. When in a dream we
make use of the projections on houses for catching hold of, we
may be reminded of a common vulgar expression for welldeveloped breasts: ‘She’s got something to catch hold of.’
There is another popular expression in such cases: ‘She’s got
plenty of wood in front of the house’, which seems to confirm
our interpretation of wood as a female, maternal symbol.
And, speaking of wood, it is hard to understand how that
material came to represent what is maternal and female. But
here comparative philology may come to our help. Our German

160

DREAMS

word ‘Holz' seems to come from the same root as the Greek
‘vAt) [hule]’, meaning ‘stuff’ ‘raw material’. This seems to be an
instance of the not uncommon event of the general name of a
material eventually coming to be reserved for some particular
material. Now there is an island in the Atlantic named
‘Madeira’. This name was given to it by the Portuguese when
they discovered it, because at that time it was covered all over
with woods. For in the Portuguese language ‘madeira’ means
‘wood’. You will notice, however, that ‘madeira’ is only a
slightly modified form of the Latin word 'materia1, which once
more means ‘material’ in general. But ‘materia1 is derived from
‘mater', ‘mother’: the material out of which anything is made is,
as it were, a mother to it. This ancient view of the thing sur­
vives, therefore, in the symbolic use of wood for ‘woman’ or
‘mother’.
Birth is regularly expressed in dreams by some connection
with water: one falls into the water or one comes out of the
water—one gives birth or one is born. We must not forget that
this symbol is able to appeal in two ways to evolutionary truth,
Not only are all terrestrial mammals, including man’s ancestors,
descended from aquatic creatures (this is the more remote of the
two facts), but every individual mammal, every human being,
spent the first phase of its existence in water—namely as an
embryo in the amniotic fluid in its mother’s uterus, and came
out of that water when it was born. I do not say that the
dreamer knows this; on the other hand, I maintain that he need
not know it. There is something else that the dreamer probably
knows from having been told it in his childhood; and I even
maintain of that too that his knowledge of it contributed
nothing to the construction of the symbol. He was told in his
nursery that the stork brings the babies. But where does it
fetch them from? From the pond, or from the stream—once
again, then, from the water. One of my patients after he had
been given this information—he was a little Count at the time
-^-disappeared for a whole afternoon. He was found at last
lying by the edge of the castle pool, with his little face bending
over the surface of the water eagerly peering down to try and
see the babies at the bottom. [Cf. p. 318 below.]
In myths about the birth of heroes—to which Otto Rank
[1909] has devoted a comparative study, the oldest being that

X. SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS

161

of King Sargon of Agade (about 2800 b.c.)—a predominant
part is played by exposure in the water and rescue from the
water. Rank has perceived that these are representations of
birth, analogous to those that are usual in dreams. If one
rescues someone from the water in a dream, one is making one­
self into his mother, or simply into a mother. In myths a person
who rescues a baby from the water is admitting that she is the
baby’s true mother. There is a well-known comic anecdote
according to which an intelligent Jewish boy was asked who
the mother of Moses was. He replied without hesitation: ‘The
Princess.’ ‘No’, he was told, ‘she only took him out of the water.’
‘That’s what she says’, he replied, and so proved that he had
found the correct interpretation of the myth.1
Departure in dreams means dying. So, too, if a child asks
where someone is who has died and whom he misses, it is
common nursery usage to reply that he has gone on a journey.
Once more I should like to contradict the belief that the dream­
symbol is derived from this evasion. The dramatist is using the
same symbolic connection when he speaks of the after-life as
‘the undiscovered country from whose bourn no traveller re­
turns’. Even in ordinary life it is common to speak of ‘the last
journey’. Every one acquainted with ancient rituals is aware of
how seriously (in the religion of Ancient Egypt, for instance)
the idea is taken of a journey to the land of the dead. Many
copies have survived of The Book of the Dead, which was sup­
plied to the mummy like a Baedeker to take with him on the
journey. Ever since burial-places have been separated from
dwelling-places the dead person’s last journey has indeed
become a reality.
It is just as little the case that genital symbolism is something
that is found only in dreams. Every one of you has probably at
one time or another spoken impolitely of a woman as an ‘alte
Schachtel' [‘old box’], perhaps without knowing that you were
using a genital symbol. In the New Testament we find woman
referred to as ‘the weaker vessel’. The Hebrew scriptures,
written in a style that comes close to poetry, are full of sexually
symbolic expressions, which have not always been correctly
understood and whose exegesis (for instance, in the case of the
1 [Freud used this ‘correct interpretation of the myth’ as the basis of
his last work, Moses and Monotheism (1939a).]

162

DREAMS

Song of Solomon1) has led to some misunderstandings. In
later Hebrew literature it is very common to find a woman
represented by a house, whose door stands for the sexual
orifice. A man complains, for instance, in a case of lost vir­
ginity, that he has ‘found the door open’. So, too, the symbol of
a table for a woman in these writings. Thus, a woman says of
her husband: ‘I laid the table for him, but he turned it round.’
Lame children are said to come about through the man’s
‘turning the table round’. I take these examples from a paper
by Dr. L. Levy of Brunn [1914].
The fact that ships, too, in dreams stand for women is made
credible by the etymologists, who tell us that \SW#"[ship]’ was
originally the name of an earthenware vessel and is the same
word as ‘Schqff’ [a dialect word meaning ‘tub’]. That ovens
represent women and the uterus is confirmed by the Greek
legend of Periander of Corinth and his wife Melissa. The tyrant,
according to Herodotus, conjured up the shade of his wife,
whom he had loved passionately but had murdered out of
jealousy, to obtain some information from her. The dead
woman proved her identity by saying that he (Periander) had
‘pushed his bread into a cold oven’, as a disguise for an event which
no one else could know of. In the periodical Anthropophyteia,
edited by F. S. Krauss, an invaluable source of knowledge of
sexual anthropology,2 we learn that in a particular part of Ger­
many they say of a woman who has given birth to a child that ‘her
oven has come to pieces’. Kindling fire, and everything to do with
it, is intimately interwoven with sexual symbolism. Flame is
always a male genital, and the hearth is its female counterpart.
If you may have felt surprised at the frequency with which
landscapes are used in dreams to represent the female genitals,
you can learn from mythology the part played by Mother Earth
in the concepts and cults of the peoples of antiquity and how
their view of agriculture was determined by this symbolism.
You will perhaps be inclined to trace the fact that in dreams a
room represents a woman to the common usage in our lan­
guage by which ‘Frau’ is replaced by ‘Frauenzimmer’3—the
1 [Some examples are given in I. of D., 5, 346.]
* [Cf. Freud’s appreciative letter to Krauss (1910/).]
8 [Literally ‘woman’s apartment’. The word is very often used in
German as a slightly derogatory synonym for ‘woman’.]

X. SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS

163

human being is replaced by the apartment allotted to her.
Similarly we speak of the ‘Sublime Porte’1, meaning the Sultan
and his government. So too the title of the Ancient Egyptian
ruler, ‘Pharaoh’, means simply ‘Great Courtyard’. (In the
Ancient East the courts between the double gateways of a city
were public meeting-places like the market-places of the clas­
sical world.) This derivation, however, appears to be too super­
ficial. It seems to me more likely that a room became the symbol
of a woman as being the space which encloses human beings.
We have already found ‘house’ used in a similar sense; and
mythology and poetical language enable us to add ‘city’,
‘citadel’, ‘castle’ and ‘fortress’ as further symbols for ‘woman’.
The question could be easily settled from the dreams of people
who do not speak or understand German. During the last few
years I have mainly treated foreign-speaking patients, and ]
seem to remember that in their dreams too ‘Rimmer’ [‘room’I
meant ‘Frauenzimmer", though they had no similar usage in their
languages. There are other indications that the symbolic rela­
tion can go beyond the limits of language—which, incidentally
was asserted long ago by an old investigator of dreams, Schubert
[1814]. However, none of my dreamers were completely
ignorant of German, so the decision must be left to psycho­
analysts who can collect data from unilingual people in other
countries.
There is scarcely one of the symbolic representations of the
male genitals which does not recur in joking, vulgar or poetic
usage, especially in the ancient classical dramatists. But here we
meet not only the symbols which appear in dreams, but others
besides—for instance tools employed in various operations, and
particularly the plough. Moreover, the symbolic representation
of masculinity leads us to a very extensive and much disputed
region, which, on grounds of economy, we shall avoid. I should
like, however, to devote a few words to one symbol, which, as it
were, falls outside this class—the number 3.2 Whether this
number owes its sacred character to this symbolic connection
remains undecided. But what seems certain is that a number of
tripartite things that occur in nature—the clover leaf, for
1 [Literally, ‘Gateway’, the old diplomatic term for the Ottoman
Court at Constantinople before 1923, derived via the French from the
Turkish title.]
2 [Cf. p. 220 below.]

164

DREAMS

instance—owe their use for coats of arms and emblems to this
symbolic meaning. Similarly, the tripartite lily—the so-called
fleur-de-lis—and the remarkable heraldic device of two islands
so far apart as Sicily and the Isle of Man—the triskeles (three
bent legs radiating from a centre)—seem to be stylized versions
of the male genitals. Likenesses of the male organ were regarded
in antiquity as the most powerful apotropaic (means of defence)
against evil influences, and, in conformity with this, the lucky
charms of our own day can all be easily recognized as genital or
sexual symbols. Let us consider a collection of such things—as
they are worn, for instance, in the form of small silver hanging
trinkets: a four-leaved clover, a pig, a mushroom, a horse-shoe,
a ladder, a chimney-sweep. The four-leaved clover has taken
the place of the three-leaved one which is really suited to be a
symbol. The pig is an ancient fertility symbol. The mushroom
is an undoubted penis-symbol: there are mushrooms [fungi]
which owe their systematic name {Phallus impudicus) to their
unmistakable resemblance to the male organ. The horseshoe
copies the outline of the female genital orifice, while the
chimney-sweep, who carries the ladder, appears in this com­
pany on account of his activities, with which sexual intercourse
is vulgarly compared. (Cf. Anthropophyteia.') We have made the
acquaintance of his ladder in dreams as a sexual symbol; here
German linguistic usage comes to our help and shows us how
the word ‘steigen’ [‘to climb’, or ‘to mount’] is used in what is
par excellence a sexual sense. We say ‘den Frauen nachsteigen’ [‘to
run’ (literally ‘climb’) ‘after women’], and ‘ein alter Steiger’ [‘an
old rake’ (literally ‘climber’)]. In French, in which the word
for steps on a staircase is ‘marches’, we find a precisely analogous
term ‘un vieux marcheur’. The fact that in many large animals
climbing or ‘mounting’ on the female is a necessary preliminary
to sexual intercourse probably fits into this context.1
‘Pulling off a branch’ as a symbolic representation of mas­
turbation is not merely in harmony with vulgar descriptions of
the act2 but has far-reaching mythological parallels. But that
masturbation, or rather the punishment for it—castration—,
should be represented by the falling out or pulling out of teeth
1 [This is largely repeated from Freud’s Nuremberg Congress paper
(1910</), Standard Ed., 11, 143.]
2 [Cf. the English ‘tossing off’.]

X. SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS

165

is especially remarkable, since there is a counterpart to it in
anthropology which can be known to only a very small number
of dreamers. There seems to me no doubt that the circumcision
practised by so many peoples is an equivalent and substitute
for castration. And we now learn that certain primitive tribes
in Australia carry out circumcision as a puberty rite (at the
festival to celebrate a boy’s attaining sexual maturity), while
other tribes, their near neighbours, have replaced this act by
the knocking out of a tooth.
Here I bring my account of these specimens to an end. They
are only specimens. We know more on the subject; but you may
imagine how much richer and more interesting a collection like
this would be if it were brought together, not by amateurs like
us, but by real professionals in mythology, anthropology, philo­
logy and folklore.

A few consequences force themselves on our notice; they
cannot be exhaustive, but they offer us food for reflection.
In the first place we are faced by the fact that the dreamer has
a symbolic mode of expression at his disposal which he does not
know in waking life and does not recognize. This is as extra­
ordinary as if you were to discover that your housemaid under­
stood Sanskrit, though you know that she was bom in a
Bohemian village and never learnt it. It is not easy to account
for this fact by the help of our psychological views. We can
only say that the knowledge of symbolism is unconscious1 to the
dreamer, that it belongs to his unconscious mental life. But
even with this assumption we do not meet the point. Hitherto
it has only been necessary for us to assume the existence of
unconscious endeavours—endeavours, that is, of which, tem­
porarily or permanently, we know nothing. Now, however, it
is a question of more than this, of unconscious pieces of know­
ledge, of connections of thought, of comparisons between dif­
ferent objects which result in its being possible for one of them
to be regularly put in place of the other. These comparisons are
not freshly made on each occasion; they lie ready to hand and
are complete, once and for all. This is implied by the fact of
their agreeing in the case of different individuals—possibly,
indeed, agreeing in spite of differences of language. What can
1 [Cf. footnote, p. 21.]

166

DREAMS

be the origin of these symbolic relations? Linguistic usage
covers only a small part of them. The multiplicity of par­
allels in other spheres of knowledge are mostly unknown to
the dreamer; we ourselves have been obliged to collect them
laboriously.
Secondly, these symbolic relations are not something peculiar
to dreamers or to the dream-work through which they come to
expression. This same symbolism, as we have seen, is employed
by myths and fairy tales, by the people in their sayings and
songs, by colloquial linguistic usage and by the poetic imagina­
tion. The field of symbolism is immensely wide, and dream­
symbolism is only a small part of it: indeed, it serves no useful
purpose to attack the whole problem from the direction of
dreams. Many symbols which are commonly used elsewhere
appear in dreams very seldom or not at all. Some dream­
symbols are not to be found in all other fields but only, as you
have seen, here and there. One gets an impression that what we
are faced with here is an ancient but extinct mode of expression,
of which different pieces have survived in different fields, one
piece only here, another only there, a third, perhaps, in
slightly modified forms in several fields. And here I recall the
phantasy of an interesting psychotic patient, who imagined
a ‘basic language’ of which all these symbolic relations
would be residues.1
Thirdly, it must strike you that the symbolism in the other
fields I have mentioned is by no means solely sexual symbolism,
whereas in dreams symbols are used almost exclusively for the
expression of sexual objects and relations. This is not easily
explained either. Are we to suppose that symbols which
originally had a sexual significance later acquired another
application and that, furthermore, the toning-down of repre­
sentation by symbols into other kinds of representation may
be connected with this? These questions can evidently not
be answered so long as we have considered dream-symbolism
alone. We can only hold firmly to the suspicion that there
is a specially intimate relation between true symbols and
sexuality.
In this connection we have been given an important hint
1 [This was Senatsprasident Schreber, whose case history was
analysed by Freud (1911c), Standard Ed., 12, 23.]

X. SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS

167

during the last few years. A philologist, Hans Sperber [1912], of
Uppsala, who works independently of psycho-analysis, has put
forward the argument that sexual needs have played the biggest
part in the origin and development of speech. According to him,
the original sounds of speech served for communication, and
summoned the speaker’s sexual partner; the further develop­
ment of linguistic roots accompanied the working activities of
primal man. These activities, he goes on, were performed in
common and were accompanied by rhythmically repeated
utterances. In this way a sexual interest became attached to
work. Primal man made work acceptable, as it were, by treat­
ing it as an equivalent and substitute for sexual activity. The
words enunciated during work in common thus had two mean­
ings; they denoted sexual acts as well as the working activity
equated with them. As time went on, the words became de­
tached from the sexual meaning and fixed to the work. In later
generations the same thing happened with new words, which
had a sexual meaning and were applied to new forms of work.
In this way a number of verbal roots would have been formed,
all of which were of sexual origin and had subsequently lost
their sexual meaning. If the hypothesis I have here sketched out
is correct, it would give us a possibility of understanding dream­
symbolism. We should understand why dreams, which pre­
serve something of the earliest conditions, have such an ex­
traordinarily large number of sexual symbols, and why, in
general, weapons and tools always stand for what is male, while
materials and things that are worked upon stand for what is
female. The symbolic relation would be the residue of an
ancient verbal identity; things which were once called by the
same name as the genitals could now serve as symbols for them
in dreams.
The parallels we have found to dream-symbolism also allow
us to form an estimate of the characteristic of psycho-analysis
which enables it to attract general interest in a way in which
neither psychology nor psychiatry has succeeded in doing. In
the work of psycho-analysis links are formed with numbers of
other mental sciences, the investigation of which promises
results of the greatest value: links with mythology and phil­
ology, with folklore, with social psychology and the theory of
religion. You will not be surprised to hear that a periodical

168

DREAMS

has grown up on psycho-analytic soil whose sole aim is to
foster these links. This periodical is known as Imago, founded
in 1912 and edited by Hanns Sachs and Otto Rank.1 In all
these links the share of psycho-analysis is in the first instance
that of giver and only to a less extent that of receiver. It is
true that this brings it an advantage in the fact that its strange
findings become more familiar when they are met with again
in other fields; but on the whole it is psycho-analysis which
provides the technical methods and the points of view whose
application in these other fields should prove fruitful. The
mental life of human individuals, when subjected to psycho­
analytic investigation, offers us the explanations with the
help of which we are able to solve a number of riddles in the
life of human communities or at least to set them in a true
light.
Incidentally, I have said nothing at all to you yet as to the
circumstances in which we can obtain our deepest insight into
the hypothetical ‘primal language’ and as to the field in which
most of it has survived. Until you know this you cannot form
an opinion of its whole significance. For this field is that of the
neuroses and its material is the symptoms and other manifesta­
tions of neurotic patients, for the explanation and treatment of
which psycho-analysis was, indeed, created.
The fourth of my reflections takes us back to the beginning
and directs us along our prescribed path. I have said [p. 149]
that even if there were no dream-censorship dreams would still
not be easily intelligible to us, for we should still be faced with
the task of translating the symbolic language of dreams into
that of our waking thought. Thus symbolism is a second and
independent factor in the distortion of dreams, alongside of the
dream-censorship. It is plausible to suppose, however, that the
dream-censorship finds it convenient to make use of symbolism,
since it leads towards the same end—the strangeness and in­
comprehensibility of dreams.
It will shortly become clear whether a further study of dreams
may not bring us up against yet another factor that contributes
to the distortion of dreams. But I should not like to leave the
subject of dream-symbolism without once more [p. 152] touch1 [It ceased publication in 1941. A journal with a similar aim, The
American Imago, vias, founded by Hanns Sachs in Boston in 1939.]

X. SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS

169

ing on the problem of how it can meet with such violent
resistance in educated people when the wide diffusion of sym­
bolism in myths, religion, art and language is so unquestionable.
May it not be that what is responsible is once again its connec­
tion with sexuality?

LECTURE XI

THE DREAM-WORKi
Ladies and Gentlemen,—When you have thoroughly grasped
the dream-censorship and representation by symbols, you will
not yet, it is true, have completely mastered the distortion in
dreams, but you will nevertheless be in a position to understand
most dreams. In doing so you will make use of both of the two
complementary techniques: calling up ideas that occur to the
dreamer till you have penetrated from the substitute to the
genuine thing and, on the ground of your own knowledge, re­
placing the symbols by what they mean. Later on we shall dis­
cuss some uncertainties that arise in this connection.
We can now take up once more a task that we tried to carry
out previously with inadequate means, when we were studying
the relations between the elements of dreams and the genuine
things they stood for. We laid down four main relations of the
kind [p. 120 ff.]: the relation of a part to a whole, approximation
or allusion, the symbolic relation and the plastic representation
of words. We now propose to undertake the same thing on a
larger scale, by comparing the manifest content of a dream as a
whole with the latent dream as it is revealed by interpretation.
I hope you will never again confuse these two things with
each other. If you reach that point, you will probably have gone
further in understanding dreams than most readers of my Inter­
pretation of Dreams. And let me remind you once again that the
work which transforms the latent dream into the manifest one
is called the dream-work. The work which proceeds in the con­
trary direction, which endeavours to arrive at the latent dream
from the manifest one, is our work of interpretation. This work of
interpretation seeks to undo the dream-work. The dreams of
infantile type which we recognize as obvious fulfilments of
wishes have nevertheless experienced some amount of dream­
work—they have been transformed from a wish into an actual
experience and also, as a rule, from thoughts into visual images.
1 [The whole of Chapter VI of I. ofD. (over a third of the entire book)
is devoted to the dream-work.]
170

XI. THE DREAM-WORK

171

In their case there is no need for interpretation but only for un­
doing these two transformations. The additional dream-work
that occurs in other dreams is called ‘dream-distortion’, and
this has to be undone by our work of interpretation.
Having compared the interpretations of numerous dreams, I
am in a position to give you a summary description of what the
dream-work does with the material of the latent dream­
thoughts. I beg you, however, not to try to understand too much
of what I tell you. It will be a piece of description which should
be listened to with quiet attention.

The first achievement of the dream-work is condensation.1 By
that we understand the fact that the manifest dream has a
smaller content than the latent one, and is thus an abbreviated
translation of it. Condensation can on occasion be absent; as a
rule it is present, and very often it is enormous. It is never
changed into the reverse; that is to say, we never find that the
manifest dream is greater in extent or content than the latent
one. Condensation is brought about (1) by the total omission
of certain latent elements, (2) by only a fragment of some com­
plexes in the latent dream passing over into the manifest one
and (3) by latent elements which have something in common
being combined and fused into a single unity in the manifest
dream.
If you prefer it, we can reserve the term ‘condensation’ for
the last only of these processes. Its results are particularly easy
to demonstrate. You will have no difficulty in recalling in­
stances from your own dreams of different people being con­
densed into a single one. A composite figure of this kind may
look like A perhaps, but may be dressed like B, may do some­
thing that we remember C doing, and at the same time we may
know that he is D. This composite structure is of course empha­
sizing something that the four people have in common. It is
possible, naturally, to make a composite structure out of things
or places in the same way as out of people, provided that the
various things and places have in common something which is
emphasized by the latent dream. The process is like construct­
ing a new and transitory concept which has this common
1 [Condensation is discussed, with numerous examples, in Section A
of Chapter VI of Z. of D., 4, 279 ff.]
S.F. XV—

1A

172

DREAMS

element as its nucleus. The outcome of this superimposing of
the separate elements that have been condensed together is as a
rule a blurred and vague image, like what happens if you take
several photographs on the same plate.1
The production of composite structures like these must be of
great importance to the dream-work, since we can show that,
where in the first instance the common elements necessary for
them were missing, they are deliberately introduced—for in­
stance, through the choice of the words by which a thought is
expressed. We have already come across condensations and
composite structures of this sort. They played a part in the pro­
duction of some slips of the tongue. You will recall the young
man who offered to ‘begleitdigeri1 [‘begleiten. (accompany)’ + fbe~
leidigen (insult)’, p. 33] a lady. Moreover, there are jokes of
which the technique is based on a condensation like this.12 But
apart from these cases, it may be said that the process is some­
thing quite unusual and strange. It is true that counterparts to
the construction of these composite figures are to be found in
some creations of our imagination, which is ready to combine
into a unity components of things that do not belong together
in our experience—in the centaurs, for instance, and the fabu­
lous beasts which appear in ancient mythology or in Bocklin’s
pictures. The ‘creative’ imagination, indeed, is quite incapable
of inventing anything; it can only combine components that are
strange to one another. But the remarkable thing about the
procedure of the dream-work lies in what follows. The material
offered to the dream-work consists of thoughts—a few of which
may be objectionable and unacceptable, but which are cor­
rectly constructed and expressed. The dream-work puts these
thoughts into another form, and it is a strange and incompre­
hensible fact that in making this translation (this rendering, as
it were, into another script or language) these methods of
merging or combining are brought into use. After all, a trans­
lation normally endeavours to preserve the distinctions made
in the text and particularly to keep things that are similar
separate. The dream-work, quite the contrary, tries to condense
1 [Freud more than once compared the result of condensation with
Francis Galton’s ‘composite photographs’, e.g. I. of D., 4, 139.]
2 [This technique is discussed, with many examples, in the first section
of Chapter II of Freud’s book on jokes (1905c), Standard Ed., 8, 16 ff.]

XI. THE DREAM-WORK

173

two different thoughts by seeking out (like a joke) an ambigu­
ous word in which the two thoughts may come together. We
need not try to understand this feature all at once, but it may
become important for our appreciation of the dream-work.
But although condensation makes dreams obscure, it does not
give one the impression of being an effect of the dream-censor­
ship. It seems traceable rather to some mechanical or economic
factor, but in any case the censorship profits by it.
The achievements of condensation can be quite extra­
ordinary. It is sometimes possible by its help to combine two
quite different latent trains of thought into one manifest dream,
so that one can arrive at what appears to be a sufficient inter­
pretation of a dream and yet in doing so can fail to notice a
possible ‘over-interpretation ’.1
In regard to the connection between the latent and the mani­
fest dream, condensation results also in no simple relation
being left between the elements in the one and the other. A
manifest element may correspond simultaneously to several
latent ones, and, contrariwise, a latent element may play a part
in several manifest ones—there is, as it were, a criss-cross re­
lationship [cf. p. 125]. In interpreting a dream, moreover, we
find that the associations to a single manifest element need not
emerge in succession: we must often wait till the whole dream
has been interpreted.
Thus the dream-work carries out a very unusual kind of
transcription of the dream-thoughts: it is not a word-for-word
or a sign-for-sign translation; nor is it a selection made accord­
ing to fixed rules—as though one were to reproduce only the
consonants in a word and to leave out the vowels; nor is it what
might be described as a representative selection—one element
being invariably chosen to take the place of several; it is some­
thing different and far more complicated.

The second achievement of the dream-work is displacement.12
Fortunately we have made some preliminary examination of
1 [This is commented on at several points in I. of D., e.g., 5, 523.
An example of such a second interpretation will be found ibid., 4,149.]
2 [Displacement is the subject of Section B of Chapter VI of I. of D.,
4, 305 ff.; but it comes up for discussion at a great many other places
in the book.]

174

DREAMS

this: for we know that it is entirely the work of the dream­
censorship. It manifests itself in two ways: in the first, a latent
element is replaced not by a component part of itself but by
something more remote—that is, by an allusion; and in the
second, the psychical accent is shifted from an important ele­
ment on to another which is unimportant, so that the dream
appears differently centred and strange.
Replacing something by an allusion to it is a process familiar
in our waking thought as well, but there is a difference. In
waking thought the allusion must be easily intelligible, and the
substitute must be related in its subject-matter to the genuine
thing it stands for. Jokes, too, often make use of allusion. They
drop the precondition of there being an association in subject­
matter, and replace it by unusual external1 associations such as
similarity of sound, verbal ambiguity, and so on. But they re­
tain the precondition of intelligibility: a joke would lose all its
efficiency if the path back from the allusion to the genuine thing
could not be followed easily.2 The allusions employed for dis­
placement in dreams have set themselves free from both of these
restrictions. They are connected with the element they replace
by the most external and remote relations and are therefore
unintelligible; and when they are undone, their interpretation
gives the impression of being a bad joke3 or of an arbitrary and
forced explanation dragged in by the hair of its head. For the
dream-censorship only gains its end if it succeeds in making it
impossible to find the path back from the allusion to the genuine
thing.
Displacement of accent is unheard-of as a method of express­
ing thoughts. We sometimes make use of it in waking thought
in order to produce a comic effect. I can perhaps call up the
impression it produces of going astray if I recall an anecdote.
There was a blacksmith in a village, who had committed a
capital offence. The Court decided that the crime must be
1 [An ‘external’ association is one that is based not on the meaning
of the two associated words, but on superficial connections (such as
similarity of sound) or purely accidental ones.]
2 [An account of the ‘allusion’ technique of jokes with a number of
examples appears in Section II of Chapter II of the book on jokes
(1905c), Standard Ed., 8, 74 ff. The necessity for their being easily
intelligible is discussed ibid., 150.]
8 [This is further discussed on p. 235 f. below.]

XI. THE DREAM-WORK

175

punished; but as the blacksmith was the only one in the village
and was indispensable, and as on the other hand there were
three tailors living there, one of them was hanged instead.1

The third achievement of the dream-work is psychologically
the most interesting. It consists in transforming thoughts into
visual images.12 Let us keep it clear that this transformation
does not affect everything in the dream-thoughts; some of them
retain their form and appear as thoughts or knowledge in the
manifest dream as well; nor are visual images the only form
into which thoughts are transformed. Nevertheless they com­
prise the essence of the formation of dreams; this part of the
dream-work is, as we already know, the second most regular
one [p. 129], and we have already made the acquaintance of
the ‘plastic’ representation of words in the case of individual
dream-elements [p. 121].
It is clear that this achievement is not an easy one. To form
some idea of its difficulties, let us suppose that you have under­
taken the task of replacing a political leading article in a news­
paper by a series of illustrations. You will thus have been
thrown back from alphabetic writing to picture writing. In so
far as the article mentioned people and concrete objects you
will replace them easily and perhaps even advantageously by
pictures; but your difficulties will begin when you come to the
representation of abstract words and of all those parts of speech
which indicate relations between thoughts—such as particles,
conjunctions and so on. In the case of abstract words you will
be able to help yourselves out by means of a variety of devices.
For instance, you will endeavour to give the text of the article
a different wording, which may perhaps sound less usual but
which will contain more components that are concrete and
capable of being represented. You will then recall that most
abstract words are ‘watered-down’ concrete ones, and you will
for that reason hark back as often as possible to the original con­
crete meaning of such words. Thus you will be pleased to find
1 [This was a favourite anecdote of Freud’s. He told it ten years earlier
than this in his book on jokes (1905c), Standard Ed., 8, 206, and again
eight years later in The Ego and the Id (19236), ibid., 19, 45.]
2 [The main discussion of this is in Section G of Chapter VI of
I. of D., 4, 310 ff.]

176

DREAMS

that you can represent the ‘possession’ of an object by a real,
physical sitting down on it.1 And the dream-work does just the
same thing. In such circumstances you will scarcely be able to
expect very great accuracy from your representation: similarly,
you will forgive the dream-work for replacing an element so
hard to put into pictures as, for example, ‘adultery’ [‘EAebruch’, literally, ‘breach of marriage’], by another breach—a
broken leg [‘Beinbruch’].2 And in this way you will succeed to
1 [The German word ‘besitzen’ (‘to possess’) is more obviously con­
nected with sitting than its English equivalent (‘sitzen’ = ‘to sit’). An
example of‘sitting down on’ in a dream with the meaning of‘possession’
occurred in one of the dreams of‘Little Hans’. See Section II of his case
history (19096), Standard Ed., 10, 37 and 39.]
2 While I am correcting the proofs of these pages chance has put into
my hands a newspaper cutting which offers an unexpected confirmation
of what I have written above:—
‘DIVINE PUNISHMENT

‘A Broken Arm for a Broken Marriage.
‘Frau Anna M., wife of a militiaman, sued Frau Klementine K. for
adultery. According to the statement of claim, Frau K. had carried on
an illicit relationship with Karl M., while her own husband was at the
front and was actually making her an allowance of 70 Kronen [about
£3.10 or $17] a month. Frau K. had already received a considerable
amount of money from the plaintiff’s husband, while she and her child
had to live in hunger and poverty. Fellow-soldiers of her husband had
informed her that Frau K. had visited taverns with M. and had sat
there drinking till far into the night. On one occasion the defendant had
asked the plaintiff’s husband in the presence of several other soldiers
whether he would not get a divorce soon from “his old woman” and set
up with her. Frau K.’s caretaker also reported that she had repeatedly
seen the plaintiff’s husband in the house most incompletely dressed.
‘Before a court in the Leopoldstadt [district of Vienna] Frau K.
yesterday denied knowing M., so that there could be no question of
her having intimate relations with him.
‘A witness, Albertine M., stated, however, that she had surprised
Frau K. kissing the plaintiff’s husband.
‘At a previous hearing, M., under examination as a witness, had
denied having intimate relations with the defendant. Yesterday the
Judge received a letter in which the witness withdrew the statements he
had made on the earlier occasion and admitted that he had had a love­
affair with Frau K. up till the previous June. He had only denied his
relations with the defendant at the former hearing because she had
come to him before the hearing and begged him on her knees to save
her and say nothing. “Today”, the witness wrote, “I feel compelled

XI. THE DREAM-WORK

177

some extent in compensating for the clumsiness of the picture
writing that is supposed to take the place of the alphabetic script.
For representing the parts of speech which indicate relations
between thoughts—‘because’, ‘therefore’, ‘however’, etc.—you
will have no similar aids at your disposal; those constituents of
the text will be lost so far as translation into pictures goes. In
the same way, the dream-work reduces the content of the
dream-thoughts to its raw material of objects and activities.
You will feel pleased if there is a possibility of in some way
hinting, through the subtler details of the pictures, at certain
relations not in themselves capable of being represented. And
just so does the dream-work succeed in expressing some of the
content of the latent dream-thoughts by peculiarities in the
form of the manifest dream—by its clarity or obscurity, by its
division into several pieces, and so on. The number of part­
dreams into which a dream is divided usually corresponds to
the number of main topics or groups of thoughts in the latent
dream. A short introductory dream will often stand in the rela­
tion of a prelude to a following, more detailed, main dream or
may give the motive for it1; a subordinate clause in the dream­
thoughts will be replaced by the interpolation of a change of
scene into the manifest dream, and so on. Thus the form of
dreams is far from being without significance and itself calls for
interpretation. When several dreams occur during the same
night, they often have the same meaning and indicate that an
attempt is being made to deal more and more efficiently with a
stimulus of increasing insistence.2 In individual dreams a par­
ticularly difficult element may be represented by several symbols
—by ‘doublets’.®

If we make a series of comparisons between the dream­
thoughts and the manifest dreams which replace them, we
to make a full confession to the Court, for I have broken my left arm
and this seems to me to be a divine punishment for my wrong-doing.”
‘The Judge stated that the penal offence had lapsed under the statute
of limitations. The plaintiff then withdrew her claim and the defendant
was discharged.’
1 [This is discussed, with an example, in I. of D., 4, 314—16,]
2 [Cf. ibid., 333-5.]
8 [In philology the term is used of two different words with the same
etymology: e.g. ‘fashion’ and ‘faction’, both from the Latin factio’.]

178

DREAMS

shall come upon all kinds of things for which we are unpre­
pared: for instance, that nonsense and absurdity in dreams have
their meaning. At this point, indeed, the contrast between the
medical and the psycho-analytic view of dreams reaches a pitch
of acuteness not met with elsewhere. According to the former,
dreams are senseless because mental activity in dreams has
abandoned all its powers of criticism; according to our view,
on the contrary, dreams become senseless when a piece of criti­
cism included in the dream-thoughts—a judgement that ‘this is
absurd’—has to be represented. The dream you are familiar
with of the visit to the theatre (‘three tickets for 1 florin 50’)
[p. 122] is a good example of this. The judgement it expressed
was: ‘it was absurd to marry so early.’ 1
Similarly, in the course of our work of interpretation we
learn what it is that corresponds to the doubts and uncertainties
which the dreamer so often expresses as to whether a particular
element occurred in a dream, whether it was this or whether,
on the contrary, it was something else. There is as a rule noth­
ing in the latent dream-thoughts corresponding to these doubts
and uncertainties; they are entirely due to the activity of the
dream-censorship and are to be equated with an attempt at
elimination which has not quite succeeded.12

Among the most surprising findings is the way in which the
dream-work treats contraries that occur in the latent dream.
We know already [p. 171] that conformities in the latent
material are replaced by condensations in the manifest dream.
Well, contraries are treated in the same way as conformities,
and there is a special preference for expressing them by the
same manifest element. Thus an element in the manifest dream
which is capable of having a contrary may equally well be ex­
pressing either itself or its contrary or both together: only the
sense can decide which translation is to be chosen. This con­
nects with the further fact that a representation of ‘no’—or at
any rate an unambiguous one—is not to be found in dreams.
A welcome analogy to this strange behaviour of the dream­
1 [Absurdity in dreams is discussed in Section G of Chapter VI of
.
.
2 [Cf. ibid., 5, 515-17. Doubt as a symptom of obsessional neurosis
is discussed in Lecture XVII (p. 259 f. below).]

I. of D., 5,426-45.]

XI. THE DREAM-WORK

179

work is provided for us in the development of language. Some
philologists have maintained that in the most ancient languages
contraries such as ‘strong—weak’, ‘light—dark’, ‘big—small’
are expressed by the same verbal roots. (What we term ‘the
antithetical meaning of primal words.’) Thus in Ancient Egyp­
tian ‘ken’ originally meant ‘strong’ and ‘weak’. In speaking,
misunderstanding from the use of such ambivalent words was
avoided by differences of intonation and by the accompanying
gesture, and in writing, by the addition of what is termed a
‘determinative’—a picture which is not itself intended to be
spoken. For instance, ‘ken’ meaning ‘strong’ was written with a
picture of a little upright man after the alphabetic signs; when
‘ken’ stood for ‘weak’, what followed was the picture of a man
squatting down limply. It was only later, by means of slight
modifications of the original homologous word, that two dis­
tinct representations were arrived at of the contraries included
in it. Thus from ‘kerd ‘strong—weak’ were derived ‘ken’ ‘strong’
and ‘kan’ weak’. The remains of this ancient antithetical mean­
ing seem to have been preserved not only in the latest develop­
ments of the oldest languages but also in far younger ones and
even in some that are still living. Here is some evidence of this,
derived from K. Abel (1884).1
In Latin, words that remained ambivalent in this way are
‘altus’ (‘high’ and ‘deep’) and ‘sacer’ (‘sacred’ and ‘accursed’).
As instances of modifications of the same root I may mention
‘clamare’ (‘to cry’), ‘clam’ (‘softly’, ‘quietly’, ‘secretly’); ‘Siems'
(‘dry’), ‘shocks’ (‘juice’). And in German: ‘Stimme’ [‘voice’],
‘stumm’ [‘dumb’].
If we compare related languages, there are numerous
examples. In English, ‘to lock’; in German, ‘Loch’ [‘hole’] and
‘Lucke’ [‘gap’]. In English, ‘to cleave’; in German, ‘kleberi [‘to
stick’].
The English word ‘without’ (which is really ‘with—without’)
is used to-day for ‘without’ alone. ‘With’, in addition to its
combining sense, originally had a removing one; this is still to
be seen in the compounds ‘withdraw’ and ‘withhold’. Similarly
with the German ‘wieder’ [‘together with’ and ‘wider’ ‘against’].
1 [Freud wrote a long review of Abel’s monograph (1910e), from
which much of what he says here is quoted in a condensed form. He
returns to the subject in Lecture XV, p. 229 f. below.]

180

DREAMS

Another characteristic of the dream-work also has its counter­
part in the development of language. In Ancient Egyptian, as
well as in other, later languages, the order of the sounds in a
word can be reversed, while keeping the same meaning.
Examples of this in English and German are: ‘Topf' [‘pot’]—
‘pot’; ‘boat’—‘tub’; ‘hurry’—‘Ruhs' [‘rest’]; ‘Balkeri [‘beam’]—
‘Kloberi [‘log’] and ‘club’; ‘wait’—‘tduwen' [‘tarry’]. Similarly in
Latin and German: ‘capers'—‘packen’ [‘to seize’]; ‘ren'—‘Mien?
[‘kidney’].
Reversals like this, which occur here with individual words,
take place in various ways in the dream-work. We already
know reversal of meaning, replacement of something by its
opposite [p. 178]. Besides this we find in dreams reversals of
situation, of the relation between two people—a ‘topsy-turvy’
world. Quite often in dreams it is the hare that shoots the
sportsman. Or again we find a reversal in the order of events, so
that what precedes an event causally comes after it in the dream
—like a theatrical production by a third-rate touring company,
in which the hero falls down dead and the shot that killed him
is not fired in the wings till afterwards. Or there are dreams
where the whole order of the elements is reversed, so that to
make sense in interpreting it we must take the last one first and the
first one last. You will remember too from our study of dream­
symbolism that going or falling into the water means the same
as coming out of it—that is, giving birth or being born [p. 153],
and that climbing up a staircase or a ladder is the same thing
as coming down it [p. 158], It is not hard to see the advan­
tage that dream-distortion can derive from this freedom of
representation.
These features of the dream-work may be described as
archaic. They are equally characteristic of ancient systems of
expression by speech and writing and they involve the same
difficulties, which we shall have to discuss again later in a
critical sense.1
And now a few more considerations. In the case of the dream­
work it is clearly a matter of transforming the latent thoughts
which are expressed in words into sensory images, mostly of a
visual sort. Now our thoughts originally arose from sensory
images of that kind: their first material and their preliminary
1 [See Lecture XIII below.]

XI. THE DREAM-WORK

181

stages were sense impressions, or, more properly, mnemic
images of such impressions. Only later were words attached to
them and the words in turn linked up into thoughts. The dream­
work thus submits thoughts to a regressive treatment1 and un­
does their development; and in the course of the regression
everything has to be dropped that had been added as a new
acquisition in the course of the development of the mnemic
images into thoughts.

Such then, it seems, is the dream-work. As compared with the
processes we have come to know in it, interest in the manifest
dream must pale into insignificance. But I will devote a few
more remarks to the latter, since it is of it alone that we have
immediate knowledge.
It is natural that we should lose some of our interest in the
manifest dream. It is bound to be a matter of indifference to
us whether it is well put together, or is broken up into a series
of disconnected separate pictures. Even if it has an apparently
sensible exterior, we know that this has only come about
through dream-distortion and can have as little organic relation
to the internal content of the dream as the fagade of an Italian
church has to its structure and plan. There are other occasions
when this fagade of the dream has its meaning, and reproduces
an important component of the latent dream-thoughts with
little or no distortion. But we cannot know this before we have
submitted the dream to interpretation and have been able to
form a judgement from it as to the amount of distortion that
has taken place. A similar doubt arises when two elements in a
dream appear to have been brought into a close relation to each
other. This may give us a valuable hint that we may bring to­
gether what corresponds to these elements in the latent dream
as well; but on other occasions we can convince ourselves that
what belongs together in the dream-thoughts has been torn
apart in the dream.
In general one must avoid seeking to explain one part of the
manifest dream by another, as though the dream had been
coherently conceived and was a logically arranged narrative.
On the contrary, it is as a rule like a piece of breccia, com­
posed of various fragments of rock held together by a binding
1 [The subject of ‘regression’ is discussed at length in Lecture XXII.]

182

DREAMS

medium, so that the designs that appear on it do not belong to
the original rocks imbedded in it. And there is in fact one part
of the dream-work, known as ‘secondary revision’,1 whose busi­
ness it is to make something whole and more or less coherent
out of the first products of the dream-work. In the course of
this, the material is arranged in what is often a completely mis­
leading sense and, where it seems necessary, interpolations are
made in it.
On the other hand, we must not over-estimate the dream­
work and attribute too much to it. The achievements I have
enumerated exhaust its activity; it can do no more than con­
dense, displace, represent in plastic form and subject the whole
to a secondary revision.12 What appear in the dream as ex­
pressions of judgement, of criticism, of astonishment or of in­
ference—none of these are achievements of the dream-work and
they are very rarely expressions of afterthoughts about the
dream; they are for the most part portions of the latent dream­
thoughts which have passed over into the manifest dream with
a greater or less amount of modification and adaptation to the
context. Nor can the dream-work compose speeches. With a
few assignable exceptions, speeches in dreams are copies and
combinations of speeches which one has heard or spoken one­
self on the day before the dream and which have been included
in the latent thoughts either as material or as the instigator of
the dream.3 The dream-work is equally unable to carry out cal­
culations. Such of them as appear in the manifest dream are
mostly combinations of numbers, sham calculations which are
quite senseless qua calculations and are once again only copies
of calculations in the latent dream-thoughts.4 In these circum­
stances it is not to be wondered at that the interest which had
turned to the dream-work soon tends to move away from it to
the latent dream-thoughts, which are revealed, distorted to a
greater or less degree, by the manifest dream. But there is no
justification for carrying this shift of interest so far that, in look­
ing at the matter theoretically, one replaces the dream entirely
1 [This is the subject of Section I of Chapter VI of I. of D., 5,488 ff.]
2 [Elsewhere Freud excluded secondary revision from the dream­
work. Cf. ‘An Evidential Dream’ (1913a), Standard Ed., 12, 275 and n.]
8 [Cf. I. ofD., 5, 418 ff.]
4 [Cf. I. ofD., 5, 414 ff.]

XI. THE DREAM-WORK

183

by the latent dream-thoughts and makes some assertion about
the former which only applies to the latter. It is strange that the
findings of psycho-analysis could be misused to bring about this
confusion. One cannot give the name of ‘dream’ to anything
other than the product of the dream-work—that is to say, the
form into which the latent thoughts have been transmuted by
the dream-work. [Cf. p. 222 ff.]
The dream-work is a process of quite a singular kind, of which
the like has not yet become known in mental life. Condensa­
tions, displacements, regressive transformations of thoughts into
images—such things are novelties whose discovery has already
richly rewarded the labours of psycho-analysis. And you can
see once more, from the parallels to the dream-work, the con­
nections which have been revealed between psycho-analytic
studies and other fields—especially those concerned in the de­
velopment of speech and thought.1 You will only be able to
form an idea of the further significance of these discoveries
when you learn that the mechanism of dream-construction is
the model of the manner in which neurotic symptoms arise.
I am also aware that we are not yet able to make a survey of
the whole of the new acquisitions which these studies have
brought to psychology. I will only point out the fresh proofs
they have provided of the existence of unconscious mental acts
—for this is what the latent dream-thoughts are—and what an
unimaginably broad access to a knowledge of unconscious
mental life we are promised by the interpretation of dreams.
But now the time has no doubt come for me to demonstrate
to you from a variety of small examples of dreams what I have
been preparing you for in the course of these remarks.
1 [See also some remarks on the construction of jokes on p. 235f.
below.]

LECTURE XII

SOME ANALYSES OF
SAMPLE DREAMS
Ladies and Gentlemen,—You must not be disappointed if I
once again put before you fragments of dream-interpretations
instead of inviting you to take part in the interpretation of a
nice big dream. You will argue that after so many preparations
you have a right to it, and you will express your conviction that
after so many thousands of dreams have been successfully inter­
preted, it should have been possible long since to have brought
together a collection of excellent sample dreams on which all
our assertions about the dream-work and the dream-thoughts
could be demonstrated. Just so. But the difficulties that stand in
the way of the fulfilment of your wish are too many.
In the first place I must admit that no one carries on the
interpretation of dreams as his main occupation. How does it
come about, then, that people do interpret them? Occasionally,
with no particular end in view, one may interest oneself in the
dreams of an acquaintance, or one may work through one’s own
dreams for a time in order to train oneself in psycho-analytic
work; but for the most part what one has to deal with are the
dreams of neurotic patients who are under psycho-analytic
treatment. These latter dreams are excellent material and are
in no way inferior to those of healthy people; but the technique
of the treatment necessitates our subordinating dream-inter­
pretation to therapeutic aims, and we have to allow a whole
number of dreams to drop after we have extracted something
from them that is of service to the treatment.1 Some dreams
that occur during treatment entirely escape any full analysis:
since they have arisen out of the great mass of psychical
material which is still unknown to us, it is impossible to under­
stand them before the treatment is finished. If I were to report
dreams of this kind, it would oblige me to uncover all the
1 [An account of the reasons for this is given in ‘The Handling of
Dream-Interpretation in Psycho-Analysis’ (191 le), Standard Ed., 12,
91 ff.]
184

XII. SOME ANALYSES OF SAMPLE DREAMS

185

secrets of a neurosis as well; and that will not do for us, since
it is precisely to prepare us for the study of the neuroses that
we have attacked the problem of dreams.
You, however, would be glad to dispense with this material
and would prefer to be given an explanation of the dreams of
healthy people or of your own dreams. But this cannot be done,
on account of their content. It is impossible to submit either
oneself or anyone else whose confidence one enjoys to the ruth­
less exposure that would be involved in a detailed analysis of
his dreams, which, as you already know, are concerned with the
most intimate part of one’s personality. But there is another
difficulty in the way apart from that of providing the material.
You are aware that dreams present an alien appearance to the
dreamer himself, and much more so to anyone who is un­
acquainted with him personally. Our literature is not poor in
good and detailed dream-analyses. I myself have published a
few within the framework of case histories.1 Perhaps the best
example of the interpretation of a dream is the one reported
by Otto Rank [19104] consisting of two interrelated dreams
dreamt by a young girl, which occupy about two pages of print:
but their analysis extends to seventy-six pages. So I should need
something like a whole term to conduct you through a piece of
work of the sort. If one takes up any comparatively long and
much distorted dream, one has to give so many explanations of
it, to bring up so much material in the way of associations and
memories, to follow up so many by-paths, that a lecture about
it would be quite confusing and unsatisfactory. I must therefore
ask you to be content with what can be had more easily—an
account of small pieces of the dreams of neurotic patients, in
which it is possible to recognize this or that point in isolation.
What is easiest to demonstrate are dream-symbols and, after
them, some characteristics of the regressive representation in
dreams. In the case of each of the dreams that follow, I will
indicate why it is that I think it worth reporting.2
1 [The main instances of these are the two dreams in the analysis of
‘Dora’ (1905e) and the childhood dream of the ‘Wolf Man’ (19184).
The latter case history was not actually published until after the delivery
of this lecture, though it had already been written.]
2 [Only two of the dreams quoted here (Nos. 6 and 7) are to be found
elsewhere. Very large numbers of other examples, mainly of Freud’s
own dreams, are reported and analysed in. I. of D.]

186

DREAMS

(1) This dream consisted only of two short pictures: His uncle
was smoking a cigarette although it was a Saturday.—A woman was
caressing andfondling him [the dreamer] as though he were her child.
In regard to the first picture the dreamer (a Jew) remarked
that his uncle was a pious man who never had done and never
could do anything sinful like that. In regard to the woman in
the second picture nothing occurred to him except his mother.
These two pictures or thoughts must obviously be seen in con­
nection with each other. But how? Since he expressly disputed
the reality of his uncle’s action, it is plausible to insert an ‘if’:
‘If my uncle, that pious man, were to smoke a cigarette on a
Saturday, then I might let myself, too, be cuddled by my
mother.’ This clearly means that cuddling with his mother was
something impermissible, like smoking on a Saturday to a pious
Jew. You will recall that I told you [p. 177] that in the course
of the dream-work all the relations between the dream-thoughts
drop out; these are resolved into their raw material and it is the
task of the interpretation to re-insert the omitted relations.
(2) As a result of my publications on dreams I have in a sense
become a public consultant on matters relating to them, and
for many years I have been receiving communications from the
most various sources in which dreams are reported to me or
submitted to my judgement. I am of course grateful to anyone
who adds enough material to the dream to make an interpreta­
tion possible or who gives an interpretation himself. The follow­
ing dream, dreamt by a medical student in Munich and dating
from the year 1910, falls into this category. I am bringing it up
in order to show you how impossible it is in general to under­
stand a dream till the dreamer has given us his information
about it. For I suspect that at bottom you consider that the
ideal method of dream-interpretation is by filling in the mean­
ing of the symbols and that you would like to discard the tech­
nique of obtaining associations to the dream; and I am anxious
to disabuse you of this damaging mistake.
‘July 13, 1910. Towards morning I had this dream: I was
bicycling down the street in Tubingen when a brown dachshund rushed
up behind me and seized me by the heel. After a little I got off, sat down
on a step, and began to hit at the beast, which had bitten firm hold of

XII. SOME ANALYSES OF SAMPLE DREAMS

187

me. (I had no disagreeable feelings either from the bite or from
the scene as a whole.) Some elderly ladies were sitting opposite me and
grinning at me. Then I woke up and, as has often happened before, at
the moment of transition to waking, the whole dream was clear to me'
Symbols are of little help here. But the dreamer reported: ‘I
have recently fallen in love with a girl, but only from seeing her
in the street, and I have had no means of getting in contact
with her. The dachshund might have been the pleasantest way
of doing so, especially as I am a great animal-lover and I liked
this same characteristic in the girl.’ He added that he had re­
peatedly intervened in furious dog-fights with great skill and
often to the astonishment of the onlookers. We learn then that
the girl he was attracted by was always to be seen in the com­
pany of this particular dog. As far as the manifest dream was
concerned, however, the girl was omitted and only the dog
associated with her was left. The elderly ladies who grinned at
him may perhaps have taken the girl’s place. His further re­
marks threw no adequate light on this point. The fact that he
was bicycling in the dream is a direct repetition of the remem­
bered situation. He never met the girl with the dog except
when he was on his bicycle.
(3) When anyone has lost someone near and dear to him, he
produces dreams of a special sort for some time afterwards, in
which knowledge of the death arrives at the strangest com­
promises with the need to bring the dead person to life again.
In some of these dreams the person who has died is dead and
at the same time still alive, because he does not know he is
dead; only if he did know would he die completely. In others,
he is half dead and half alive, and each of these states is indi­
cated in a particular way. We must not describe these dreams
as simply nonsensical; for being brought to life again is no more
inconceivable in dreams than it is, for instance, in fairy tales,
in which it occurs as a very usual event. So far as I have been
able to analyse such dreams, it has turned out that they are
capable of a reasonable solution, but that the pious wish to
bring the dead person back to life has been able to operate by
the strangest means. I will now put before you a dream of this
kind which sounds sufficiently queer and senseless and the
analysis of which will show you much for which our theoretical
S.F. XV—N

188

DREAMS

discussions will have prepared you. It is the dream of a man
who had lost his father several years before:
His father was dead but had been exhumed and looked bad. He had
been living since then and the dreamer was doing all he could to prevent
him noticing it. (The dream then went on to other and apparently
very remote matters.)
His father was dead; we know that. His having been exhumed
did not correspond to reality; and there was no question of
reality in anything that followed. But the dreamer reported that
after he had come away from his father’s funeral, one of his
teeth began to ache. He wanted to treat the tooth according to
the precept of Jewish doctrine: ‘If thy tooth offend thee, pluck
it out!’ And he went off to the dentist. But the dentist said: ‘One
doesn’t pluck out a tooth. One must have patience with it. I’ll
put something into it to kill it; come back in three days and
I’ll take it out.’
‘That “take out”,’ said the dreamer suddenly, ‘that’s the
exhuming!’
Was the dreamer right about this? It only fits more or less,
not completely; for the tooth was not taken out, but only some­
thing in it that had died. But inaccuracies of this kind can, on
the evidence of other experiences, well be attributed to the
dream-work. If so, the dreamer had condensed his dead father
and the tooth that had been killed but retained; he had fused
them into a unity. No wonder, then, that something senseless
emerged in the manifest dream, for, after all, not everything
that was said about the tooth could fit his father. Where
could there possibly be a tertium comparationis [p. 152 above]
between the tooth and his father, to make the condensation
possible?
But no doubt he must have been right, for he went on to say
that he knew that if one dreams of a tooth falling out it means
that one is going to lose a member of one’s family.
This popular interpretation, as we know,1 is incorrect or at
least is correct only in a scurrilous sense. We shall be all the
more surprised to find the topic thus touched upon re-appearing
behind other portions of the dream’s content.
The dreamer now began, without any further encourage­
ment, to talk about his father’s illness and death as well as
1 [See pp. 156 f. and 164 f. above.]

XII. SOME ANALYSES OF SAMPLE DREAMS

189

about his own relations with him. His father was ill for a long
time, and the nursing and treatment had cost him (the son) a
lot of money. Yet it was never too much, he was never im­
patient, he never wished that after all it might soon come to an
end. He was proud of his truly Jewish filial piety towards his
father, of his strict obedience to Jewish Law. And here we are
struck by a contradiction in the thoughts belonging to the
dream. He had identified the tooth and his father. He wanted
to proceed with the tooth in accordance with Jewish Law,
which commanded him to pluck it out if it caused him pain or
offence. He also wanted to proceed with his father, too, in
accordance with the precepts of the Law, but in this case it
commanded him to spare no expense or trouble, to take every
burden on himself and to allow no hostile intention to emerge
against the object that was causing him pain. Would not the
two attitudes have agreed much more convincingly if he had
really developed feelings towards his sick father similar to those
towards his sick tooth—that is, if he had wished that an early
death would put an end to his unnecessary, painful and costly
existence?
I do not doubt that this was really his attitude towards his
father during the tedious illness and that his boastful assurances
of his filial piety were meant to distract him from these
memories. Under such conditions the death-wish against a
father is apt to become active and to hide itself under the mask
of such sympathetic reflections as that ‘it would be a happy re­
lease for him’. But please observe that here we have passed a
barrier in the latent dream-thoughts themselves. No doubt the
first portion of them was unconscious only temporarily—that is,
during the construction of the dream; but his hostile impulses
against his father must have been permanently unconscious.1
They may have originated from scenes in his childhood and
have occasionally slipped into consciousness, timidly and dis­
guised, during his father’s illness. We can assert this with greater
certainty of other latent thoughts which have made unmis­
takable contributions to the content of the dream. Nothing, in­
deed, is to be discovered in the dream of his hostile impulses
towards his father. But if we look for the roots of such hostility
to a father in childhood, we shall recall that fear of a father is
1 [This is carried further at the end of Lecture XIII, p. 212 below.]

190

DREAMS

set up because, in the very earliest years, he opposes a boy’s
sexual activities, just as he is bound to do once more from
social motives after the age of puberty. This relation to his
father applies to our dreamer as well: his love for him included
a fair admixture of awe and anxiety, which had their source
in his having been early deterred by threats from sexual
activity.
The remaining phrases in the manifest dream can be ex­
plained now in relation to the masturbation complex. ‘He
looked bad’ is indeed an allusion to another remark of the den­
tist’s to the effect that it looks bad if one has lost a tooth in that
part of the month; but it relates at the same time to the ‘looking
bad’ by which a young man at puberty betrays, or is afraid he
betrays, his excessive sexual activity. It was not without relief
to his own feelings that in the manifest content the dreamer
displaced the ‘looking bad’ from himself on to his father—one
of the kinds of reversal by the dream-work which is familiar to
you [p. 180]. ‘He had been living since then’ coincides with the wish
to bring back to life as well as with the dentist’s promise that
the tooth would survive. The sentence ‘the dreamer was doing
all he could to prevent him {his father) noticing if is very subtly
devised to mislead us into thinking that it should be completed
by the words ‘that he was dead’. The only completion, however,
that makes sense comes once more from the masturbation com­
plex; in that connection it is self-evident that the young man
did all he could to conceal his sexual life from his father. And
finally, remember that we must always interpret what are
called ‘dreams with a dental stimulus’ as relating to masturba­
tion and the dreaded punishment for it. [Cf. footnote, p. 188.]
You can see now how this incomprehensible dream came
about. It was done by producing a strange and misleading con­
densation, by disregarding all the thoughts that were in the
centre of the latent thought-process and by creating ambiguous
substitutes for the deepest and chronologically most remote of
those thoughts.1
(4) We have already tried repeatedly to come to understand
1 [A fragment of a dream very similar to, if not identical with, this one
is discussed in I. of D., 5, 430-1, as well as in ‘Formulations on the Two
Principles of Mental Functioning’ (191 li>), Standard Ed., 12, 225-6.]

XII. SOME ANALYSES OF SAMPLE DREAMS

191

the matter-of-fact and commonplace dreams which have noth­
ing senseless or strange about them but which raise the ques­
tion of why one should dream about such indifferent stuff.
[Cf. pp. 96-7 and 117.] I will therefore offer you another
example of this kind—three interconnected dreams dreamt by
a young lady in one night.
(a) She was walking across the hall of her house and struck her head
against a low-hanging chandelier and drew blood.
No reminiscence, nothing that had really happened. The in­
formation she produced in response to it led in quite other
directions. ‘You know how badly my hair’s falling out. “My
child,” my mother said to me yesterday, “if this goes any
further you’ll have a head as smooth as a bottom.” ’ So here
the head stands for the other end of the body. We can under­
stand the chandelier, without any help, as a symbol: all objects
capable of being lengthened are symbols of the male organ
[p. 155]. It was therefore a matter of bleeding at the lower end
of the body, which had arisen from contact with a penis. This
might still be ambiguous. Her further associations showed that
what was in question concerned a belief that menstrual bleed­
ing arises from sexual intercourse with a man—a piece of
sexual theory which counts many faithful believers among
immature girls.
(6) She saw a deep pit in the vineyard, which she knew had been
caused by a tree being tom out. She added a remark that the tree
was missing. She meant that she had not seen the tree in her
dream; but the same wording served to express another thought
which made the symbolic interpretation quite certain. The
dream referred to another piece of infantile sexual theory—to
the belief that girls originally had the same genitals as boys and
that their later shape was the result of castration (the tearing
out of a tree).
(c) She was standing in front of the drawer of her writing-table
which she was so familiar with that she could tell at once if anyone had
been into it. Like all drawers, chests and cases, the writing-table
drawer stood for the female genitals [p. 156]. She knew that
indications of sexual intercourse (and, as she thought, of touch­
ing) could be observed on the genitals and had long feared such
a discovery. In all these three dreams, I think, the accent is to
be placed on knowledge. She was recalling the period of her

192

DREAMS

sexual researches when she was a child, of whose outcome she
had been quite proud at the time.1
(5) Here is a little more symbolism. But this time I must start
with a short preamble on the psychical situation. A gentleman
who had passed a night in intercourse with a lady described her
as one of those motherly characters in whom the wish for a child
breaks irresistibly through in intercourse with a man. The cir­
cumstances of this meeting, however, called for a precaution
which prevented the fertilizing semen from reaching the
woman’s uterus. On waking up after this night the woman
reported the following dream:
An officer in a red cap was running after her in the street. She fled
from him, and ran up the stairs with him still after her. Breathless, she
reached her flat, slammed the door behind her and locked it. He stayed
outside, and when she looked through the peep-hole, he was sitting on a
bench outside and weeping.
You will no doubt recognize the pursuit by the officer in the
red cap and the breathless climbing upstairs as representing the
sexual act [p. 158]. The fact that it was the dreamer who locked
herself up against her pursuer will serve as an example of the
reversals that are used so commonly in dreams [p. 180], for it
was the man who had avoided the consummation of the sexual
act. In the same way, her grief was displaced on to the man, for
it was he who wept in the dream—and this was simultaneously
a representation of the emission of semen.
I feel sure that you have heard some time or other that it is
asserted by psycho-analysis that every dream has a sexual
meaning. Well, you yourselves are in a position to form a judge­
ment of the incorrectness of this reproach. You have become
acquainted with wishful dreams dealing with the satisfaction of
the most obvious needs—hunger and thirst and the longing for
freedom—with dreams of convenience and of impatience, and
also with purely covetous and egoistic dreams. But at the same
time you should bear in mind, as one of the results of psycho­
analytic research, that greatly distorted dreams give expres­
sion mainly (though, again, not exclusively) to sexual wishes.
1 [The sexual researches and sexual theories of children are discussed
in Lecture XX (p. 317 below).]

XII. SOME ANALYSES OF SAMPLE DREAMS

193

(6) I have a particular reason for piling up instances of the
use of symbols in dreams. At our first meeting [p. 16 ff.] I
lamented the difficulty of providing demonstrations and so of
carrying conviction in giving instruction in psycho-analysis.
And I have no doubt that you have since come to agree with
me. But the different theses of psycho-analysis are so intimately
connected that conviction can easily be carried over from a
single point to a larger part of the whole. It might be said of
psycho-analysis that if anyone holds out a little finger to it it
quickly grasps his whole hand. No one, even, who has accepted
the explanation of parapraxes can logically withhold his belief
in all the rest. A second, equally accessible position is offered by
dream-symbolism. Here is the dream of an uneducated woman
whose husband was a policeman and who had certainly never
heard anything about dream-symbolism or psycho-analysis.
Then judge for yourselves whether its explanation by the help
of sexual symbols can be called arbitrary and forced:
‘. . . Then someone broke into the house and she was frightened and
called out for a policeman. But he had gone into a church, to which a
number of steps led up, accompanied amicably by two tramps. Behind the
church there was a hill and above it a thick wood. The policeman was
dressed in a helmet, gorget and cloak. He had a brown beard. The two
tramps, who went along peaceably with the policeman, had sack-like
aprons tied round their middles. In front of the church a path led up to
the hill; on both sides of it there grew grass and brushwood, which be­
came thicker and thicker and, at the top of the hill, turned into a regular
wood.'1
You will have no trouble in recognizing the symbols used.
The male genitals are represented by a triad of figures, and the
female ones by a landscape with a chapel, hill and wood. Once
again you find steps as a symbol for the sexual act. What is
called a hill in the dream is also called one in anatomy—the
Mons Veneris [the hill of Venus].
(7) And here is yet another dream that must be solved by
the insertion of symbols. It is notable and convincing from
the fact that the dreamer himself translated all the symbols,
though he had no sort of previous theoretical knowledge of
1 [This dream, originally reported by B. Dattner, appears in I. of D.,
5, 366, in a very slightly different version.]

194

DREAMS

dream-interpretation. Such an attitude is quite unusual and
its determinants are not precisely understood:1
'He was going for a walk with his father in a place which must cer­
tainly have been the Prater,2 since he saw the Rotunda, with a small
annex in front of it to which a captive balloon was attached, though it
looked rather limp. His father asked him what all this was for; he was
surprised at his asking, but explained it to him. Then they came into a
courtyard which had a large sheet of tin laid out in it. Hisfather wanted
to pull off a large piece of it, but first looked around to see if anyone was
watching. He told him that he need only tell the foreman and he could
take some without any bother. A staircase led down from thisyard into a
shaft, whose walls were cushioned in some soft material, rather like a
leather armchair. At the end of the shaft was a longish platform and then
another shaft started. . . .’
The dreamer himself interpreted: ‘The Rotunda was my
genitals and the captive balloon in front of it was my penis,
whose limpness I have reason to complain of.’ Going into
greater detail, then, we may translate the Rotunda as the bot­
tom (habitually regarded by children as part of the genitals)
and the small annex in front of it as the scrotum. His father
asked him in the dream what all this was—that is, what was the
purpose and function of the genitals. It seemed plausible to
reverse this situation and turn the dreamer into the questioner.
Since he had in fact never questioned his father in this way, we
had to look upon the dream-thought as a wish, or take it as a
conditional clause, such as: ‘If I had asked my father for sexual
enlightenment. . . .’ We shall presently find the continuation of
this thought in another part of the dream.
The courtyard in which the sheet of tin was spread out is not
to be taken symbolically in the first instance. It was derived
from the business premises of the dreamer’s father. For reasons
of discretion I have substituted ‘tin’ for another material in
which his father actually dealt: but I have made no other
change in the wording of the dream. The dreamer had entered
his father’s business and had taken violent objection to the
somewhat dubious practices on which the firm’s earnings in
part depended. Consequently the dream-thought I have just
interpreted may have continued in this way: ‘(If I had asked
1 [Cf. some remarks on this in I. of D., 5, 351.]
2

[The ‘Bois de Boulogne’ of Vienna. It includes an amusement park.]

XII. SOME ANALYSES OF SAMPLE DREAMS

195

him), he would have deceived me just as he deceives his cus­
tomers.’ As regards the ‘pulling off’ which served to represent
his father’s dishonesty in business, the dreamer himself produced
a second explanation—namely that it stood for masturbating.
Not only have we long been familiar with this interpretation
[p. 164], but there was something to confirm it in the fact that
the secret nature of masturbation was represented by its re­
verse: it might be done openly. Just as we should expect, the
masturbatory activity was once again displaced on to the
dreamer’s father, like the questioning in the first scene of the
dream. He promptly interpreted the shaft as a vagina, having
regard to the soft cushioning of its walls. I added on my own
authority [p. 158] that climbing down, like climbing up in
other cases, described sexual intercourse in the vagina.
The dreamer himself gave a biographical explanation of the
further details—that the first shaft was followed by a longish
platform and then by another shaft. He had practised inter­
course for a time but had then given it up on account of in­
hibitions, and he now hoped to be able to resume it by the
help of the treatment.1
(8) The two following dreams were dreamt by a foreigner of
a highly polygamous disposition. I repeat them to you as
evidence for my assertion [p. 142] that the dreamer’s own ego
appears in every dream even if it is concealed in the manifest
content. The trunks in the dreams were symbols of women:
(a) He was starting on a journey; his luggage was taken to the
station on a carriage, a number of trunks piled up on it, and among them
two big black ones, like boxes of samples. He said to someone con­
solingly: ‘ Well, they’re only going with me as far as the station’
He did in fact travel with a great deal of luggage; but he also
brought a great many stories about women into the treatment.
The two black trunks corresponded to two dark2 women who
were at the time playing the main part in his life. One of them
had wanted to follow him to Vienna; and on my advice he had
telegraphed to put her off.
. (Z>) A scene at the customs-house: Another traveller opened his
1 [This dream and its analysis are reprinted almost exactly from

I. ofD., 5, 364-5.]
2

[In German ‘schtvarz’ (‘black’).]

196

DREAMS

box and, coolly smoking a cigarette, said: 'There's nothing in it.' The
customs officer seemed to believe him, but felt about once more inside it,
and found something quite particularly prohibited. The traveller said
in a resigned voice: ‘ There's nothing to be done about it.'
He himself was the traveller: I was the customs officer. As a
rule he was very straightforward in making admissions; but he
had intended to keep silent to me about a new connection he
had formed with a lady, because he rightly supposed that she
was not unknown to me. He displaced the distressing situation
of being detected on to a stranger, so that he himself did not
seem to appear in the dream.
(9) Here is an example of a symbol which I have not yet
mentioned:
He met his sister in the company of two women friends who were
themselves sisters. He shook hands with both of them but not with his
sister.
No connection with any real occurrence. But his thoughts
took him back, rather, to a period in which his observations
led him to reflect on how late girls’ breasts developed. So the
two sisters were breasts; he would have liked to take hold of
them with his hand—if only it were not his sister.

(10) Here is an example of death-symbolism in a dream:
He was walking, with two people whose names he knew but hadfor­
gotten when he woke up, across a very high, steep iron bridge. Suddenly
they had both gone, and he saw a ghost-like man in a cap and linen
clothes. He asked him if he was the telegraph-boy. No. Was he the
driver? No. Then he walked on further. . . . While he was still
dreaming he felt acute anxiety, and after he had woken up he
continued the dream with a phantasy that the iron bridge
suddenly broke and he fell into the abyss.
People of whom one insists that they are unknown or that one
has forgotten their names are mostly people very near to one.
The dreamer had a brother and sister; and if he had wished
that these two were dead, it would be only fair that in return
he should be victimized by a fear of death. Of the telegraph­
boy he remarked that such people always bring bad news. By
his uniform he might equally have been the lamp-lighter; but
he puts out the lamps as well, just as the Spirit of Death puts

XII. SOME ANALYSES OF SAMPLE DREAMS

197

out the torch. The driver made him think of Uhland’s poem
about King Charles’s Voyage, and reminded him of a danger­
ous sea-voyage with two companions during which he had
played the part of the King in the poem.1 The iron bridge made
him think of a recent accident and of the foolish saying: ‘Life
is a suspension bridge.1
2
(11) The following dream may count as another representa­
tion of death:
An unknown gentleman left a black-edged visiting-card on him.
(12) You will be interested in the following dream in a
number of ways, though a neurotic state in the dreamer was
one of its preconditions:
He was travelling in a railway-train. The train came to a stop in
open country. He thought there was going to be an accident and that he
must think ofgetting away. He went through all the coaches in the train
and killed everyone he met—the guard, the engine-driver, and so on.
In connection with this he thought of a story told him by a
friend. A lunatic was being conveyed in a compartment on an
Italian line, but through carelessness a traveller was allowed in
with him. The madman killed the other traveller. Thus he was
identifying himself with the madman, and based his right to do
so on an obsession by which he was tormented from time to
time that he must ‘get rid of all accessory witnesses’. But then
he himself found a better reason, and this led to the precipi­
tating cause of the dream. At the theatre the night before he
had once more seen the girl whom he had wanted to marry but
had withdrawn from because she had given him ground for
being jealous. In view of the intensity reached by his jealousy
he would, he thought, really be mad to want to marry her.
This meant that he regarded her as so untrustworthy that, in
his jealousy, he would have to kill everyone who came his way.
We have already come across walking through a series of rooms
1 [In Uhland’s poem, ‘Konig Karls Meerfahrt’, King Charles and his
twelve knights are overtaken by a storm on a voyage to the Holy Land.
The twelve knights express their uneasiness in turn—but the King sits
silently at the helm and steers the ship to safety.]
2 [This is quoted as an example of a bad joke in a footnote added in
1912 to Freud’s book on jokes (1905c), Standard Ed., 8, 139.]

198

DREAMS

(here, railway coaches) as a symbol of marriage (a reversal of
‘monogamy’) J
In connection with the train coming to a stop in open
country and his being afraid of an accident, he said that once
when he was on a railway journey there had been a sudden
stop of this kind when they were not in a station. A young lady
who was travelling with him had said that there might be going
to be a collision and that the safest thing to do was to lift one’s
legs up high. But this ‘lifting the legs high’ had also played a
part in the many walks and excursions in the country which he
had taken with the other girl in the happy early days of their
love. This was a fresh argument for thinking he would be mad
to marry her now. But my knowledge of the situation made me
feel certain that he nevertheless wished he were mad enough
to do it.
1 [This symbol had not been mentioned earlier in these lectures. But
in I. ofD., 5, 354, it is stated that a suite of rooms can stand for a brothel
or a harem, or alternatively (by reversal) for a monogamous marriage.]

LECTURE XIII

THE ARCHAIC FEATURES AND
INFANTILISM OF DREAMS
Ladies and Gentlemen,—Let us start out once more from the
conclusions we arrived at that the dream-work under the in­
fluence of the dream-censorship, transposes the latent dream­
thoughts into a different mode of expression. The latent
thoughts do not differ from our familiar conscious thoughts of
waking life. The new mode of expression is incomprehensible
to us owing to many of its features. We have said that it harks
back to states of our intellectual development which have long
since been superseded—to picture-language, to symbolic con­
nections, to conditions, perhaps, which existed before our
thought-language had developed. We have on that account
described the mode of expression of the dream-work as archaic
or regressive [p. 180 f.].
You may conclude from this that if we study the dream-work
further we must succeed in gaining valuable light on the littleknown beginnings of our intellectual development. I hope it
will be so; but this work has not so far been started upon. The
prehistory into which the dream-work leads us back is of two
kinds—on the one hand, into the individual’s prehistory, his
childhood, and on the other, in so far as each individual some­
how recapitulates in an abbreviated form the entire develop­
ment of the human race, into phylogenetic prehistory too. Shall
we succeed in distinguishing which portion of the latent mental
processes is derived from the individual prehistoric period and
which portion from the phylogenetic one? It is not, I believe,
impossible that we shall. It seems to me, for instance, that sym­
bolic connections, which the individual has never acquired by
learning, may justly claim to be regarded as a phylogenetic
heritage.
This, however, is not the only archaic characteristic of
dreams. You are all familiar, of course, from your own ex­
perience, with the remarkable amnesia of childhood. I mean
the fact that the earliest years of life, up to the age of five, six
199

200

DREAMS

or eight, have not left behind them traces in our memory like
later experiences. Here and there, it is true, we come upon
people who can boast of a continuous memory from the first
beginnings to the present day; but the other alternative, of gaps
in the memory, is by far the more frequent. There has not, in
my opinion, been enough astonishment over this fact. By the
time a child is two he can speak well, and soon shows that he is
at home in complicated mental situations; and he makes re­
marks which, if they are reported to him many years later, he
himself will have forgotten. Moreover, the memory is more
efficient at an early age, since it is less overburdened than it is
later. Nor is there any reason for regarding the function of
memory as a particularly high or difficult mental activity; on
the contrary, we can find a good memory in people of very low
intellectual standing.1
A second remarkable fact to which I must draw your atten­
tion, and which comes on top of the first one, is that out of the
void of memories that covers the earliest years of childhood
there stand out a few well-preserved recollections, mostly per­
ceived in plastic form, which cannot justify their survival. Our
memory deals with the material of the impressions which im­
pinge on us in later life by making a selection among them. It
retains what is of any importance and drops what is unimpor­
tant. But this is not true of the childhood memories that have
been retained. They do not necessarily correspond to the impor­
tant experiences of childhood years, nor even to those which
must have seemed important from the child’s point of view.
They are often so commonplace and insignificant that we can
only ask ourselves in astonishment why this particular detail has
escaped oblivion. I attempted long ago, with the help of
analysis, to attack the enigma of childhood amnesia and of the
residual memories which interrupt it, and I arrived at the con­
clusion that even in the case of children it is true in spite of
everything that only what is important remains in the memory.
But through the processes, already familiar to you, of condensa­
tion and more especially of displacement, what is important is
replaced in memory by something else which appears unim­
portant. For this reason I have called these childhood memories
1 [A longer discussion of infantile amnesia will be found in the second
of the Three Essays (W)5d), Standard Ed., 7, 174 ff.]

XIII. ARCHAIC AND INFANTILE FEATURES 201

‘screen memories’, and with a thorough analysis everything
that has been forgotten can be extracted from them.1
In psycho-analytic treatments we are invariably faced by the
task of filling up these gaps in the memory of childhood; and in
so far as the treatment is to any extent successful—that is to say,
extremely frequently—we also succeed in bringing to light the
content of these forgotten years of childhood. Those impressions
had never been really forgotten, they were only inaccessible,
latent, and had formed part of the unconscious. But it can come
about that they emerge from the unconscious spontaneously,
and this happens in connection with dreams. It appears that
dream-fife knows how to find access to these latent, infantile ex­
periences. Excellent examples of this have been reported in the
literature and I myself have been able to provide a contribution
of the kind. I once dreamt in a certain connection of a person
who must have done me a service and whom I saw clearly be­
fore me. He was a one-eyed man of small stature, stout, and
with his head sunk deep in his shoulders. I concluded from the
context that he was a doctor. Luckily I was able to enquire
from my mother, who was still alive, what the doctor at my
birth-place (which I had left when I was three) had looked like;
and I learnt from her that he was one-eyed, short, stout and
with his head sunk deep in his shoulders; and I also learnt what
the accident was for which he had come to my help and which
I myself had forgotten.2 This fact of dreams having at their dis­
posal the forgotten material of the first years of childhood is
thus a further archaic feature.3

This same piece of information can be further applied to
another of the riddles we have come up against. You recall the
amazement which was caused by our discovery that what in­
stigates dreams are actively evil and extravagantly sexual
wishes, which have made the censorship and distortion of
dreams necessary [p. 142 if.]. When we have interpreted a
1 [Screen memories had been discussed by Freud in Chapter IV of

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (19016), Standard Ed., 6, 43 ff., as
well as in a separate paper on the subject published earlier (1899a).]
2 [The dream is described in I. of D., 4, 17, where further references
will be found. The accident itself is described ibid., 5, 560.]
3 [This fact had been noted by Freud in a letter to Fliess of March 10,
1898 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 84.]

202

DREAMS

dream of this sort to the dreamer and if, to take the most
favourable case, he does not actually attack the interpretation,
he nevertheless regularly raises the question of where these
wishes come from, since they feel alien to him and their opposite
is what he is conscious of. We need have no hesitation in point­
ing out their origin. These evil wishful impulses arise from the
past, and often from a past that is not very remote. It can be
shown that there was a time when they were familiar and con­
scious, even if they are no longer so to-day. A woman, whose
dream meant that she would like to see her daughter, now
seventeen years old, dead before her eyes,1 found under our
guidance that she had indeed at one time harboured this death­
wish. The child was the fruit of an unhappy marriage which
was soon dissolved. Once, while she still bore her daughter in
her womb, in a fit of rage after a violent scene with her husband
she had beaten with her fists on her body in order to kill the
child inside it. How many mothers, who love their children
tenderly, perhaps over-tenderly, to-day, conceived them un­
willingly and wished at that time that the living thing within
them might not develop further! They may even have ex­
pressed that wish in various, fortunately harmless, actions. Thus
their death-wish against someone they love, which is later so
mysterious, originates from the earliest days of their relation­
ship to that person.
In the same way, a father had a dream which justified the
interpretation that he wished for the death of his favourite
eldest child. He too was led to remember that there had been
a time when this wish was not strange to him. When the child
was still an infant in arms, the father, discontented with his
choice of a wife, often thought that if the little creature, who
meant nothing to him, were to die, he would be free once more
and would make better use of his freedom.2 The same origin
can be shown in the case of a great number of similar impulses
1 [This dream is described at greater length in I. of D., 4, 154-5 and
referred to again ibid., 249. In these passages the girl’s age is given three
times (in letters) as ‘fifteen’. The ‘17’ (in figures) in all the German
editions of the present work is perhaps due to a misprint.]
2 [What appears to be the same story as this is told in much greater
detail in connection not with a dream but with a ‘bungled action’ near
the end of Chapter VIII of The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, Standard
Ed., 6, 187-9.]

XIII. ARCHAIC AND INFANTILE FEATURES 203

of hatred; they are recollections of something belonging to the
past, which was once conscious and played its part in mental
life. You will be inclined to conclude from this that such wishes
and such dreams ought not to arise in cases where transforma­
tions of this kind in one’s relation to someone never occurred,
where the relation was of the same kind from the first. I am
prepared to admit this; but I must remind you that what you
must take into consideration is not the wording of the dream but
its sense after it has been interpreted. It is possible that a mani­
fest dream of the death of someone loved has merely assumed a
horrifying mask and may mean something quite different, or
that the loved person is intended as a misleading substitute for
someone else.
But the same subject will suggest another and far more serious
question. ‘Even if/ you will say, ‘this death-wish was present at
one time and is confirmed by recollection, that is still no ex­
planation. After all, it was superseded long ago, and can only
be present to-day in the unconscious as no more than an un­
emotional memory, not as a powerful impulse. Nothing speaks
in favour of this last possibility. Why, then, was it recollected
at all in the dream?’ This question may justly be raised. An
attempt to answer it would lead us too far and would necessitate
our taking up a position on one of the most important points in
the theory of dreams. But I am obliged to keep within the
framework of our discussions and to exercise restraint. So pre­
pare yourselves for a provisional renunciation.1 Let us content
ourselves with the factual evidence that this superseded wish
can be shown to be the instigator of the dream, and let us pursue
our enquiry whether other evil wishes can be similarly traced
back to the past.

We will keep to wishes for getting rid of someone, which may
for the most part be attributed to the dreamer’s unrestricted
egoism. A wish of this kind can very often be pointed to as the
constructor of a dream. Whenever anyone in the course of one’s
life gets in one’s way—and how often this must happen in view
of the complication of one’s relationships in life!—a dream is
promptly ready to kill that person, even if it be father or
1 [Freud returns to this problem at the end of the present lecture
(P- 212).]
S.F. XV—O

204

DREAMS

mother, brother or sister, husband or wife. This wickedness of
human nature came as a great surprise to us and we were de­
cidedly disinclined to accept this outcome of dream-interpreta­
tion without question. But as soon as we were led to look for the
origin of these wishes in the past, we discovered the period of
the individual’s past in which there was no longer anything
strange in such egoism and such wishful impulses, directed even
against his closest relatives. It is children, and precisely in those
earliest years which are later veiled by amnesia, who often ex­
hibit this egoism to an extremely marked degree and who in­
variably show clear rudiments or, more correctly speaking, resi­
dues of it. Children love themselves first, and it is only later that
they learn to love others and to sacrifice something of their own
ego to others. Even those people whom a child seems to love
from the beginning are loved by him at first because he needs
them and cannot do without them—once again from egoistic
motives. Not until later does the impulse to love make itself
independent of egoism. It is literally true that his egoism has
taught him to love.
In this connection it will be interesting to compare the child’s
attitude to his brothers and sisters with that towards his parents.
A small child does not necessarily love his brothers and sisters;
often he obviously does not. There is no doubt that he hates
them as his competitors, and it is a familiar fact that this atti­
tude often persists for long years, till maturity is reached or even
later, without interruption. Quite often, it is true, it is suc­
ceeded, or let us rather say overlaid, by a more affectionate
attitude; but the hostile one seems very generally to be the
earlier. This hostile attitude can be observed most easily in
children between two and a half and four or five, when a new
baby brother or sister appears. It usually meets with a very un­
friendly reception. Such remarks as ‘I don’t like him; the stork
can take him away again!’ are quite common. After this, every
opportunity is taken of disparaging the new arrival and attempts
to injure him and even murderous assaults are not unknown.
If the difference in age is less, by the time the child’s mental
activity has awakened to some degree of intensity he finds his
competitor already there and adjusts himself to him. If the dif­
ference is greater, the new baby may from the first arouse a
certain sympathy as an interesting object, a sort of live doll;

XIII. ARCHAIC AND INFANTILE FEATURES 205
and where the difference in age is of eight or more years, solicit­
ous, maternal impulses may already come into play, especially
in girls. But, honestly speaking, if one comes upon a wish for the
death of a brother or sister behind a dream, there is seldom need
to find it puzzling and one can trace its prototype without any
trouble in early childhood and often enough in later years of
companionship as well.1
There is probably no nursery without violent conflicts be­
tween its inmates. The motives for these are rivalry for parental
love, for common possessions, for living space. The hostile im­
pulses are directed against older as well as against younger
members of the family. It was, I believe, Bernard Shaw who
remarked: ‘As a rule there is only one person an English girl
hates more than she hates her mother; and thats her eldest
sister.’ 2 But there is something in this remark that strikes us as
strange. We might at a pinch find hatred and competition with
brothers and sisters intelligible. But how can we suppose that
feelings of hatred can make their way into the relation between
daughter and mother, between parents and children?
This relation is undoubtedly a more favourable one, from the
children’s point of view as well. That is what our expectations
demand; we find an absence of love far more repellent between
parents and children than between brothers and sisters. In the
former case we have, as it were, made something sacred which
in the latter we have left profane. Yet daily observation can
show us how frequently the emotional relations between parents
and their grown-up children fall behind the ideal set up by
society, how much hostility is ready to hand and would be
expressed if it were not held back by admixtures of filial piety
and affectionate impulses. The motives for this hostility are
generally known and their tendency is to divide those of the
same sex—the daughter from the mother and the father from
the son. The daughter finds in her mother the authority which
restricts her will and which is entrusted with the task of im­
posing on her the renunciation of sexual freedom which society
demands; in a few instances she even finds in her a competitor
who struggles against being supplanted. The same thing is
1 [The relations between brothers and sisters are discussed with
examples in Section D of Chapter V of I. of D., 4, 250-5.]
a [John Tanner in Alan and Superman, Act II.]

206

DREAMS

repeated between the son and his father still more glaringly. In
the son’s eyes his father embodies every unwillingly tolerated
social restraint; his father prevents him from exercising his will,
from early sexual pleasure and, where there is common prop­
erty in the family, from enjoying it. In the case of an heir to
the throne this waiting for a father’s death reaches an almost
tragic height. There seems less danger to the relation between
father and daughter or mother and son. This last provides the
purest examples of an unchangeable affection, unimpaired by
any egoistic considerations.1

Why am I speaking of these things, which are after all com­
monplaces and universally known? Because there is an unmis­
takable inclination to disavow their importance in life and to
make out that the ideal demanded by society is fulfilled far
more often than it really is. It is better, however, that the truth
should be told by psychologists rather than that the task should
be left to cynics. And, incidentally, this disavowal applies only
to real life. Narrative and dramatic works of the imagination
may freely make play with the themes that arise from a dis­
turbance of this ideal.
There is no need to feel surprised, therefore, if, in a large
number of people, dreams disclose their wish to get rid of their
parents and especially of the parent of their own sex. We may
assume that this wish is also present in waking life and is even
conscious sometimes, if it can be masked by some other motive,
as was the case with our dreamer in Example 3 [p. 189 above],
where it was replaced by pity for his father’s useless sufferings.
It is rarely that the hostility alone dominates the relationship;
far oftener it is in the background of more affectionate im­
pulses by which it is suppressed, and it must wait until a dream
isolates it, as it were. What seems to us of enormous size in a
dream, on account of this isolation, shrinks up once more when
our interpretation has given it its place in the context of real
life (Hanns Sachs).12 But we come upon this dream-wish, too,
1 [This point is discussed at greater length in Lecture XXXIII of
the New Introductory Lectures (1933a), Standard Ed., 22, 133.]
2 [The actual words used by Sachs (1912, 569) were quoted by Freud
in a passage which he inserted in 1914 on almost the last page off. ofD.
{5, 620-1).]

XIII. ARCHAIC AND INFANTILE FEATURES 207

where it has no relevance in real life, and where the adult need
never confess to it in his waking life. The reason for this is that
the deepest and most invariable motive for estrangement,
especially between two people of the same sex, has already
made itself felt in early childhood.
What I have in mind is rivalry in love, with a clear emphasis
on the subject’s sex. While he is still a small child, a son will
already begin to develop a special affection for his mother,
whom he regards as belonging to him; he begins to feel his
father as a rival who disputes his sole possession. And in the
same way a little girl looks on her mother as a person who inter­
feres with her affectionate relation to her father and who occu­
pies a position which she herself could very well fill. Observa­
tion shows us to what early years these attitudes go back. We
refer to them as the ‘Oedipus complex’, because the legend of
Oedipus realizes, with only a slight softening, the two extreme
wishes that arise from the son’s situation—to kill his father and
take his mother to wife. I do not wish to assert that the Oedipus
complex exhausts the relation of children to their parents: it can
easily be far more complicated. The Oedipus complex can,
moreover, be developed to a greater or less strength, it can even
be reversed; but it is a regular and very important factor in a
child’s mental life, and there is more danger of our under­
estimating rather than over-estimating its influence and that of
the developments which proceed from it. Incidentally, children
often react in their Oedipus attitude to a stimulus coming from
their parents, who are frequently led in their preferences by
difference of sex, so that the father will choose his daughter and
the mother her son as a favourite, or, in case of a cooling-off in
the marriage, as a substitute for a love-object that has lost its
value.1
It cannot be said that the world has shown much gratitude
to psycho-analytic research for its revelation of the Oedipus
complex. On the contrary, the discovery has provoked the most
violent opposition among adults; and those who had neglected
to take part in the repudiation of this proscribed and tabooed
emotional relationship made up for their fault later by de­
priving the complex of its value through twisted re-interpreta1 [Freud discusses the Oedipus complex at much greater length in
Lecture XXI (p. 329 ff. below).]

208

DREAMS

tions.1 It is my unaltered conviction that there is nothing in
this to be disavowed or glossed over. We must reconcile our­
selves to the fact which was recognized by the Greek legend
itself as an inevitable fate. It is once again an interesting fact
that the Oedipus complex, which has been rejected from real
life, has been left to imaginative writing, has been placed
freely, as it were, at its disposal. Otto Rank [1912&] has shown
in a careful study how the Oedipus complex has provided
dramatic authors with a wealth of themes in endless modifica­
tions, softenings and disguises—in distortions, that is to say, of
the kind which we are already familiar with as the work of a
censorship. We may therefore also ascribe this Oedipus complex
to dreamers who have been fortunate enough to escape con­
flicts with their parents in later life. And, intimately linked with
it, we find what we call the ‘castration complex’,2 the reaction
to the threats against the child aimed at putting a stop to his
early sexual activities and attributed to his father.

What we have already learnt from our study of the mental
life of children will lead us to expect to find a similar explana­
tion of the other group of forbidden dream-wishes—the exces­
sive sexual impulses. We are thus encouraged to make a study of
the development of children’s sexual life and from many
sources we arrive at what follows.
First and foremost, it is an untenable error to deny that
children have a sexual life and to suppose that sexuality only
begins at puberty with the maturation of the genitals. On the
contrary, from the very first children have a copious sexual life,
which differs at many points from what is later regarded as
normal. What in adult life is described as ‘perverse’ differs from
the normal in these respects: first, by disregarding the barrier
of species (the gulf between men and animals), secondly, by
overstepping the barrier against disgust, thirdly that against in­
cest (the prohibition against seeking sexual satisfaction from
near blood-relations), fourthly that against members of one’s
own sex and fifthly the transferring of the part played by the
genitals to other organs and areas of the body. None of these
1 [This is of course an allusion to the secession of Adler and Jung.
Cf. footnote, p. 346 below.]
2 [This is further explained in Lecture XX, p. 317 f. below.]

XIII. ARCHAIC AND INFANTILE FEATURES 209

barriers existed from the beginning; they were only gradually
erected in the course of development and education. Small
children are free from them. They recognize no frightful gulf
between human beings and animals; the arrogance with which
men separate themselves from animals does not emerge until
later.1 To begin with, children exhibit no disgust at excreta but
acquire this slowly under the pressure of education; they attach
no special importance to the distinction between the sexes, but
attribute the same conformation of the genitals to both; they
direct their first sexual lusts and their curiosity to those who are
nearest and for other reasons dearest to them—parents, brothers
and sisters, or nurses; and finally, they show (what later on
breaks through once again at the climax of a love-relation)
that they expect to derive pleasure not only from their sexual
organs, but that many other parts of the body lay claim to the
same sensitivity, afford them analogous feelings of pleasure and
can accordingly play the part of genitals. Children may thus be
described as ‘polymorphously perverse’, and if these impulses
only show traces of activity, that is because on the one hand they
are of less intensity compared with those in later life and on the
other hand all a child’s sexual manifestations are at once ener­
getically suppressed by education. This suppression is, as it
were, extended into theory; for adults endeavour to overlook
one portion of the sexual manifestations of children and to dis­
guise another portion by misinterpreting its sexual nature, so
that they can then disavow the whole of them. It is often the
very same people who in the nursery are furious with any sexual
naughtinesses of children and afterwards at their writing-tables
defend the sexual purity of the same children. When children
are left to themselves, or under the influence of seduction, they
often bring about quite considerable achievements in the way
of perverse sexual activity. Adults are of course right not to
take this too seriously and to regard it as ‘childishness’, or ‘play­
fulness’, for children are not to be condemned as fully capable
or fully responsible either before the judgement-seat of morals
or before the law; but nonetheless these things exist. They have
their importance both as indications of a child’s innate constitu­
tion and as causes and encouragements of later developments
1 [Freud enlarged on this in a contemporary paper, ‘A Difficulty in
the Path of Psycho-Analysis’ (1917a), Standard Ed., 17, 140.]

210

DREAMS

in him; they give us information on the sexual life of children
and so on human sexual life in general. If, therefore, we once
more find all these perverse wishful impulses behind our dis­
torted dreams, that only means that in this field too dreams
have taken a step backwards into the state of infancy.
Among these forbidden wishes special emphasis deserves to
be further laid on the incestuous ones—that is, on those aiming
at sexual intercourse with parents and brothers and sisters. You
know what horror is felt, or at least professed, in human society
at such intercourse, and what stress is laid on the prohibitions
directed against it. Tremendous efforts have been made to ex­
plain this horror of incest. Some people have supposed that
breeding considerations on the part of Nature have found
psychical representation in this prohibition, since inbreeding
would impair racial characters. Others have maintained that,
as a result of living together from early childhood onwards,
sexual desire has been diverted from the people in question.
In both these cases, it may be remarked, an avoidance of incest
would be secured automatically, and it would not be clear why
such severe prohibitions were called for, which would point
rather to the presence of a strong desire for it. Psycho-analytic
researches have shown unmistakably that the choice of an in­
cestuous love-object is, on the contrary, the first and invari­
able one, and that it is not until later that resistance to it sets
in; it is no doubt impossible to trace back this resistance to
individual psychology.1

Let us now bring together what our researches into child­
psychology have contributed to our understanding of dreams.
We have not only found that the material of the forgotten ex­
periences of childhood is accessible to dreams, but we have also
seen that the mental life of children with all its characteristics,
its egoism, its incestuous choice of love-objects, and so on, still
persists in dreams—that is, in the unconscious, and that dreams
carry us back every night to this infantile level. The fact is thus
confirmed that what is unconscious in mental life is also what is
infantile. The strange impression of there being so much evil in
people begins to diminish. This frightful evil is simply the
1 [The whole subject of infantile sexuality is treated again at greater
length in Lectures XX and XXI.]

XIII. ARCHAIC AND INFANTILE FEATURES 211

initial, primitive, infantile part of mental life, which we can
find in actual operation in children, but which, in part, we
overlook in them on account of their small size, and which in
part we do not take seriously since we do not expect any high
ethical standard from children. Since dreams regress to this
level, they give the appearance of having brought to light the
evil in us. But this is a deceptive appearance, by which we have
allowed ourselves to be scared. We are not so evil as we were
inclined to suppose from the interpretation of dreams.
If these evil impulses in dreams are merely infantile pheno­
mena, a return to the beginnings of our ethical development
(since dreams simply make us into children once more in our
thoughts and feelings), we need not, if we are reasonable, be
ashamed of these evil dreams.1 But what is reasonable is only a
part of mental life, a number of other things take place in the
mind which are not sensible; and so it happens that we are
ashamed of these dreams in an unreasonable way. We subject
them to the dream-censorship, we are ashamed and angry if,
as an exception, one of these wishes succeeds in making its way
into consciousness in such an undistorted form that we are
obliged to recognize it; indeed we are occasionally as ashamed
of a distorted dream as if we understood it. Only think of the in­
dignant judgement which the excellent elderly lady passed on
her uninterpreted dream of the ‘love services’ [p. 137]. So the
problem is not yet cleared up, and it is still possible that further
consideration of the evil in dreams may lead us to form another
judgement and arrive at another estimate of human nature.
[Cf. p. 338 below.]
As the outcome of our whole enquiry, let us grasp two dis­
coveries, though they only signify the beginning of fresh enigmas
and fresh doubts. First, the regression of the dream-work is not
only a formal but also a material one. It not only translates our
thoughts into a primitive form of expression; but it also revives
the characteristics of our primitive mental life—the old domin­
ance of the ego, the initial impulses of our sexual life, and even,
indeed, our old intellectual endowment, if symbolic connections
may be regarded as such. And secondly, all this, which is old
1 [The moral responsibility for the content of dreams was the subject
of a special discussion by Freud (Section B of 1925z), Standard Ed., 19,
131 ff. Cf. also p. 331 below.]

212

DREAMS

and infantile and was once dominant and alone dominant,
must to-day be ascribed to the unconscious, our ideas of which
are now becoming altered and extended. ‘Unconscious’ is no
longer the name of what is latent at the moment; the uncon­
scious is a particular realm of the mind with its own wishful
impulses, its own mode of expression and its peculiar mental
mechanisms which are not in force elsewhere. But the latent
dream-thoughts which we have discovered by interpreting
dreams do not belong to this realm; they are on the contrary
thoughts just as we might have thought them in waking life.
Nevertheless, they are unconscious. How, then, is this con­
tradiction to be solved? We begin to suspect that a distinction
is to be drawn here. Something which is derived from our con­
scious life and shares its characteristics—we call it ‘the day’s
residues’—combines with something else coming from the realm
of the unconscious in order to construct a dream. The dream­
work is accomplished between these two components. The in­
fluence exercised upon the day’s residues by the addition of the
unconscious is no doubt among the determinants of regression.
This is the deepest insight that we can reach here into the
essential nature of dreams—until we have investigated further
regions of the mind. But the time will soon have come to pro­
vide another name for the unconscious character of the latent
dream-thoughts in order to distinguish it from the unconscious
which comes from the realm of the infantile.1
We can, of course, raise another question besides: ‘What is it
that forces psychical activity during sleep to make this regres­
sion? Why does it not dispose of the mental stimuli that disturb
sleep without doing this? And if, for the purposes of the dream­
censorship, it has to make use of disguise by means of the old
and now unintelligible mode of expression, what is the point of
reviving as well the old mental impulses, wishes and character­
traits, which are superseded to-day—of making use of material
regression in addition to the formal kind?’ The only answer that
could satisfy us would be that in this way alone can a dream be
constructed, that it is not otherwise dynamically possible to get
rid of the stimulus to the dream. But so far we have no right
to give such an answer.
1 [This question is taken up again at the end of Lecture XIV,
p. 227.]

LECTURE XIV

WISH-FULFILMENT
Ladies and Gentlemen,—Shall I remind you once more of
the ground we have covered so far? Of how, when we began
applying our technique, we came up against the distortion in
dreams, of how we thought we would begin by evading it and
obtained our first decisive information on the essential nature
of dreams from the dreams of children? Of how, after that,
armed with what we had learnt from that enquiry, we made a
direct assault on dream-distortion and, as I hope, overcame it
step by step? We are bound to admit, however, that the things
we have discovered by the one path and by the other do not
entirely correspond. It will be our task to piece the two sets of
findings together and reconcile them with each other.
We found from both sources that the dream-work consists
essentially in the transformation of thoughts into a hallucina­
tory experience. How this can happen is sufficiently mysterious;
but it is a problem of general psychology with which we are not
properly concerned here. We learnt from children’s dreams that
it is the intention of the dream-work to get rid of a mental
stimulus, which is disturbing sleep, by means of the fulfilment
of a wish. We were unable to say anything similar of distorted
dreams till we found out how to interpret them. But it was
from the first our expectation that we should be able to regard
distorted dreams in the same light as those of children. The
first confirmation of this expectation was brought to us by the
discovery that in point of fact all dreams are children’s dreams,
that they work with the same infantile material, with the
mental impulses and mechanisms of childhood. Now that we
believe we have overcome dream-distortion, we must go on to
enquire whether the view of dreams as the fulfilment of wishes
is also valid of distorted dreams.
A short time ago we submitted a series of dreams to inter­
pretation, but we left wish-fulfilment completely out of account.
I feel sure that you must have repeatedly been driven to ask
yourselves: ‘But where is the wish-fulfilment, which is supposed
213

214

DREAMS

to be the aim of the dream-work?’ The question is an important
one, for it has become the question raised by our lay critics.
Human beings, as you know, have an instinctive tendency to
fend off intellectual novelties. One of the ways in which this
tendency is manifested is by immediately reducing the novelty
to the smallest proportions, by compressing it if possible into a
single catch-word. ‘Wish-fulfilment’ has become the catch­
word for the new theory of dreams. The layman asks: ‘Where
is the wish-fulfilment? ’ And instantly, having heard that dreams
are supposed to be wish-fulfilments, and in the very act of
asking the question, he answers it with a rejection. He imme­
diately thinks of countless experiences of his own with dreams,
in which the dream has been accompanied by feelings ranging
from the unpleasurable to severe anxiety, so that the assertion
made by the psycho-analytic theory of dreams seems to him
most improbable. We have no difficulty in replying that in
distorted dreams the wish-fulfilment cannot be obvious but
must be looked for, so that it cannot be pointed out until the
dream has been interpreted. We know too that the wishes in
these distorted dreams are forbidden ones—rejected by the
censorship—whose existence was precisely the cause of the
dream’s distortion, the reason for the intervention of the dream­
censorship. But it is difficult to make the lay critic understand
that before a dream has been interpreted one cannot enquire
about the fulfilment of its wish. He will keep on forgetting this.
His rejection of the theory of wish-fulfilment is actually nothing
other than a consequence of the dream-censorship, a substitute
for the rejection of the censored dream-wishes and an effluence
from it.
We too, of course, feel the need to explain to ourselves why
there are so many dreams with a distressing content and,
especially why there are anxiety-dreams. Here for the first time
we come upon the problem of affects in dreams; it would
deserve a monograph of its own, but unfortunately we cannot
enter into it. If dreams are the fulfilment of wishes, distressing
feelings should be impossible in them: the lay critics would
appear to be right there. But three kinds of complications must
be taken into account which they have not thought of.

[1] Firstly, it may be that the dream-work has not com­

XIV. WISH-FULFILMENT

215

pletely succeeded in creating a wish-fulfilment; so that a portion
of the distressing affect in the dream-thoughts has been left
over in the manifest dream. In that case analysis would have to
show that these dream-thoughts were far more distressing than
the dream constructed out of them. That much can always be
proved. If so, we must admit that the dream-work has not
achieved its aim any more than the dream of drinking, formed
in response to the stimulus of thirst, succeeded in quenching the
thirst [p. 13 3 f.]. The dreamer remains thirsty and has to wake up
in order to drink. Nevertheless it was a genuine dream, and had
lost nothing of a dream’s essential nature. We can only say:
‘Ut desint vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas.’1 The intention,
at least, which can clearly be recognized, remains praiseworthy.
Such instances of failure are no rare event. This is helped by
that fact that it is so much harder for the dream-work to alter
the sense of a dream’s affects than of its content', affects are some­
times highly resistant. What then happens is that the dream­
work transforms the distressing content of the dream-thoughts
into the fulfilment of a wish, while the distressing affect persists
unaltered. In dreams of this kind the affect is quite inap­
propriate to the content, and our critics can say that dreams
are so far from being wish-fulfilments that even one with a
harmless content can be felt as distressing. We can answer this
foolish remark by pointing out that it is precisely in dreams like
this that the wish-fulfilling purpose of the dream-work appears
most clearly, because in isolation. The error arises because
those who are unfamiliar with the neuroses picture the link
between content and affect as too intimate and therefore can­
not imagine the content being altered without a simultaneous
alteration of the expression of affect attached to it.12

[2] A second factor, which is much more important and farreaching, but which is equally overlooked by laymen, is the
following. No doubt a wish-fulfilment must bring pleasure; but
1 [‘Though the strength is lacking, the will deserves to be praised’
(Ovid, Ep. ex Pont., 3, 4, 79).]
2 [The looseness of the connection between ideas and their accom­
panying affects had been insisted on by Freud from very early times.
See, for instance, his first paper on ‘The Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’
(1894a), Standard Ed., 3, 51-2.]

216

DREAMS

the question then arises ‘To whom?’ To the person who has the
wish, of course. But, as we know, a dreamer’s relation to his
wishes is a quite peculiar one. He repudiates them and censors
them—he has no liking for them, in short. So that their
fulfilment will give him no pleasure, but just the opposite; and
experience shows that this opposite appears in the form of
anxiety, a fact which has still to be explained. Thus a dreamer
in his relation to his dream-wishes can only be compared to
an amalgamation of two separate people who are linked by
some strong element in common. Instead of enlarging on this,
I will remind you of a familiar fairy tale in which you will find
the same situation repeated. A good fairy promised a poor
married couple to grant them the fulfilment of their first three
wishes. They were delighted, and made up their minds to
choose their three wishes carefully. But a smell of sausages being
fried in the cottage next door tempted the woman to wish for a
couple of them. They were there in a flash; and this was the
first wish-fulfilment. But the man was furious, and in his rage
wished that the sausages were hanging on his wife’s nose. This
happened too; and the sausages were not to be dislodged from
their new position. This was the second wish-fulfilment; but
the wish was the man’s, and its fulfilment was most disagreeable
for his wife. You know the rest of the story. Since after all they
were in fact one—man and wife—the third wish was bound to
be that the sausages should come away from the woman’s nose.
This fairy tale might be used in many other connections; but
here it serves only to illustrate the possibility that if two people
are not at one with each other the fulfilment of a wish of one of
them may bring nothing but unpleasure to the other.1
It will not be difficult for us now to reach a still better under­
standing of anxiety-dreams. We will bring up one more observa­
tion and then make up our minds to adopt a hypothesis in
favour of which there is much to be said. The observation is
that anxiety-dreams often have a content entirely devoid of
distortion, a content which has, so to speak, evaded the censor­
ship. An anxiety-dream is often the undisguised fulfilment of a
1 [The whole of this paragraph was later included by Freud as a
footnote in the 1919 edition of I. of D., 5, 580-1. The same fairy tale is
also quoted, but in quite a different connection, in Freud’s paper on
‘The “Uncanny” ’ (1919A), Standard Ed., 17, 246.]

XIV. WISH-FULFILMENT

217

wish—not, of course, of an acceptable wish, but of a repudiated
one. The generation of anxiety has taken the place of the cen­
sorship. Whereas we can say of an infantile dream that it is the
open fulfilment of a permitted wish, and of an ordinary dis­
torted dream that it is the disguised fulfilment of a repressed
wish, the only formula which fits an anxiety-dream is that it is
the open fulfilment of a repressed wish. The anxiety is a sign
that the repressed wish has shown itself stronger than the
censorship, that it has put through, or is on the point of putting
through, its wish-fulfilment in spite of the censorship. We per­
ceive that what is for it a wish-fulfilment can only be for us,
who are on the side of the censorship, an occasion for distressing
feelings and for fending the wish off. The anxiety that emerges
in the dream is, if you like, anxiety at the strength of these wishes
which are normally held down. Why this fending-off appears
in the form of anxiety cannot be discovered from the study of
dreams alone; anxiety must clearly be studied elsewhere.1
We may suppose that what is true of undistorted anxiety­
dreams applies also to those which are partly distorted as well
as to other unpleasurable dreams, in which the distressing
feelings probably correspond to an approach to anxiety.
Anxiety-dreams are as a rule also arousal dreams; we usually
interrupt our sleep before the repressed wish in the dream has
put its fulfilment through completely in spite of the censorship.
In that case the function of the dream has failed, but its essential
nature is not altered by this. We have compared dreams to the
night-watchman or guardian of sleep, who tries to protect our
sleep from disturbance [p. 129]. The night-watchman, too,
may reach the point of waking the sleeper if he feels he is too
weak alone to drive off the disturbance or the danger. Neverthe­
less we sometimes succeed in holding on to our sleep even when
the dream begins to be precarious and to be turning into an­
xiety. We say to ourselves in our sleep ‘after all it’s only a dream’,
and sleep on.
When does it happen that a dream-wish is in a position to
overpower the censorship? The condition necessary for this may
be fulfilled equally well by the dream-wish or by the dream­
censorship. The wish may for an unknown reason be excessively
strong on some occasion; but one gets an impression that it is
1 [It is the subject of Lecture XXV below.]

218

DREAMS

more often the behaviour of the dream-censorship that is
responsible for this displacement of their relative strengths. We
have already seen [p. 143] that the censorship acts with varying
intensity in each particular case, that it treats each element of a
dream with a different degree of severity. We can now add a
further hypothesis to the effect that it is in general very variable
and does not always employ equal severity to the same objec­
tionable element. If things turn out so that on some occasion it
feels itself powerless against a dream-wish which threatens to
take it by surprise, instead of distortion, it makes use of its last
remaining expedient and abandons the state of sleep, at the
same time generating anxiety.
In this connection it strikes us that we are still quite ignorant
of why it is that these evil, repudiated wishes become active
precisely at night and disturb us during our sleep. The answer
is almost bound to lie in some hypothesis going back to the
nature of the state of sleep. In day-time the heavy weight of
censorship rests on them and as a rule makes it impossible for
them to manifest themselves in any activity. At night this
censorship, like all the other interests of mental life, is probably
withdrawn, or at least greatly reduced, in favour of the single
wish to sleep. It is this lowering of the censorship at night that
the forbidden wishes have to thank for being able to become
active once more. There are some neurotic patients who are
unable to sleep and who admit to us that their insomnia was
originally intentional. They did not dare to sleep because they
were afraid of their dreams—afraid, that is, of the results of the
weakening of the censorship. You will easily see, however, that
in spite of this the withdrawal of the censorship implies no
gross carelessness. The state of sleep paralyses our motive
powers. If our evil intentions begin to stir, they can, after all,
do nothing more than precisely cause a dream, which is harm­
less from the practical point of view. It is this soothing consid­
eration that is the basis of the highly sensible remark made by
the sleeper—made at night, it is true, but not forming part of
dream-life: ‘After all it’s only a dream. So let us leave it to take
its course, and let us sleep on.’

[3] If, in the third place, you will recall our idea that the
dreamer fighting against his own wishes is to be compared with

XIV. WISH-FULFILMENT

219

a summation of two separate, though in some way intimately
connected, people, you will understand another possibility. For
there is a possibility that the fulfilment of a wish may bring
about something very far from pleasant—namely, a punish­
ment. Here we can once more use the fairy tale of the three
wishes as an illustration. The fried sausages on a plate were the
direct fulfilment of the wish of the first person, the woman. The
sausages on her nose were the fulfilment of the wish of the
second person, the man, but were at the same time a punishment
for the woman’s foolish wish. (We shall discover in neuroses
the motive for the third wish, the last remaining one in the fairy
tale.)1 There are many such punitive trends in the mental life of
human beings; they are very powerful, and we may hold them
responsible for some of the distressing dreams.2 Perhaps you
will now say that this leaves very little over of the famous wish­
fulfilment. But if you look more closely you will admit that you
are wrong. Compared with the multiplicity (which I shall
mention later) of the things that dreams might be and accord­
ing to many authorities actually are, our solution—wish­
fulfilment, anxiety-fulfilment, punishment-fulfilment—is a very
restricted one. We may add that the anxiety is the direct
opposite of the wish, that opposites are especially close to one
another in associations and that in the unconscious they coalesce
[p. 178 ff.]; and further, that the punishment is also the ful­
filment of a wish—of the wish of the other, censoring person.

On the whole, therefore, I have made no concession to your
objection to the theory of wish-fulfilment. It is our duty, how­
ever, to be able to indicate the wish-fulfilment in any distorted
dream we may come across, and we shall certainly not evade
the task. Let us go back to the dream we have already inter­
preted of the three bad theatre-tickets for 1 florin 50 [pp. 122
and 139], from which we have already learnt so much. I hope
you still recollect it. A lady, whose husband had told her during
the day that her friend Elise, who was only three months her
junior, had become engaged, dreamt that she was at the theatre
with her husband. One side of the stalls was almost empty.
Her husband said to her that Elise and her fiancd had wanted
1 [It is not clear what is intended here.]
2 [Punishment dreams are discussed ini. of D., 5, 473-6 and 557-8.]
s.f. xv—p

220

DREAMS

to go to the theatre too but had not been able to, since they had
only got bad seats—three for 1 florin 50. She thought it would
not really have done any harm if they had. We found that the
dream-thoughts related to her anger at having married so
early and to her dissatisfaction with her husband. We may be
curious to discover how these gloomy thoughts were trans­
formed into the fulfilment of a wish and where any trace of it
is to be found in the manifest content of the dream. We already
know that the element ‘too early, in a hurry’ was eliminated
from the dream by the censorship [p. 140]. The empty stalls
were an allusion to it. The mysterious ‘three for 1 florin 50’
now becomes more intelligible to us with the help of the sym­
bolism with which we have meanwhile become acquainted.
The ‘3’1 really means a man [or husband] and the manifest
element is easy to translate: buying a husband with her dowry.
(‘I could have got one ten2 times better with my dowry.’)
‘Marrying’ is clearly replaced by ‘going to the theatre’. ‘Taking
the theatre tickets too early’ is, indeed, an immediate substitute
for ‘marrying too early’. This substitution is, however, the work
of a wish-fulfilment. Our dreamer was not always so dis­
satisfied with her early marriage as she was on the day when she
received the news of her friend’s engagement. She had been
proud of it at one time and regarded herself as at an advantage
over her friend. Simple-minded girls, after becoming engaged,
are reputed often to express their joy that they will soon be able
to go to the theatre, to all the plays which have hitherto been
prohibited, and will be allowed to see everything. The pleasure
in looking, or curiosity, which is revealed in this was no doubt
originally a sexual desire to look [scopophilia], directed towards
sexual happenings and especially on to the girls’ parents, and
hence it became a powerful motive for urging them to an early
marriage. In this way a visit to the theatre became an obvious
substitute, by way of allusion, for being married. Thus the
dreamer, in her present anger at her early marriage, harked
back to the time at which early marriage was the fulfilment of a
wish because it satisfied her scopophilia, and, under the lead of
11 have not mentioned another plausible interpretation of this ‘3’
in a childless woman, since this analysis brought up no material in
support of it. [Cf. p. 163 f. above.]
s [This is presumably a slip for ‘a hundred’. Cf. above, p. 124.]

XIV. WISH-FULFILMENT

221

this old wishful impulse, she replaced marriage by going to the
theatre.

I cannot be accused of having specially chosen out the most
convenient example as evidence of a concealed wish-fulfilment.
The procedure would have had to be the same in the case of
other distorted dreams. I cannot demonstrate this to you now,
and I will only express my conviction that it could always be
successfully accomplished. I will, however, dwell a little longer
on this theoretical point. Experience has taught me that it is
one of those most exposed to attack in the whole theory of
dreams, and that many contradictions and misunderstandings
arise from it. Apart from this, you may perhaps still be under
the impression that I have already withdrawn part of my
assertion in saying that a dream is a fulfilled wish or the opposite
of one, or a realized anxiety or punishment; and you may think
this is an opportunity of forcing further qualifications out of me.
I have also been reproached for putting forward things that
seem to me obvious in a manner that is too concise and con­
sequently unconvincing.
When someone has accompanied us so far in the interpreta­
tion of dreams and has accepted everything that has been
brought forward up to this point, it often happens that he comes
to a halt at wish-fulfilment and says: ‘Granted that dreams
always have a sense, and that that sense can be discovered by
the technique of psycho-analysis, why must that sense, all
evidence to the contrary, be invariably pushed into the formula
of wish-fulfilment? Why should not the sense of this nightly
thinking be of as many kinds as that of daytime thinking? Why,
that is, should not a dream correspond sometimes to a ful­
filled wish, sometimes, as you yourself say, to the opposite of
that or to a realized fear, but sometimes express an intention,
a warning, a reflection with its “pros” and “cons”, or a re­
proach, a scruple of conscience, an attempt at preparing for a
coming task, and so on? Why must it always be only a wish, or
at most its opposite?’
It might be thought that a difference of opinion on this
point is unimportant, if one is agreed on the rest. It is enough,
it might be said, that we have discovered the sense of dreams
and the way of recognizing it; it is of less importance if we seem

DREAMS

222

to have defined that sense too narrowly. But that is not so. A
misunderstanding on this point affects the essence of our dis­
coveries about dreams and endangers their value for the under­
standing of the neuroses. Moreover, a compromise of this sort
—what is highly thought of in commercial life as being ‘accom­
modating’—is not in place, but detrimental rather, in scientific
affairs.
My first answer to the question why dreams should not have
a variety of meanings in the sense indicated is as usual in such
cases: ‘I don’t know why they shouldn’t. I should have no
objection. As far as I’m concerned it could be so. There’s only
one detail in the way of this broader and more convenient view
of dreams—that it isn’t so in reality.’ My second answer would
be that the hypothesis that dreams correspond to a variety of
forms of thinking and intellectual operations is not unfamiliar
to me myself. I once reported a dream in one of my case
histories which appeared on three nights in succession and then
no more, and I explained this behaviour by the fact that the
dream corresponded to an intention, and did not need to be
repeated after the intention had been carried out.1 Later on I
published a dream which corresponded to an admission.2 How,
then, can I contradict myself and assert that dreams are never
anything but a fulfilled wish?
I do it because I will not allow a foolish misunderstanding
to pass which may rob us of the fruit of our efforts with dreams
—a misunderstanding which confuses the dream with the latent
dream-thoughts, and asserts of the former something that
applies solely to the latter. For it is quite correct to say that a
dream can represent and be replaced by everything you have
just enumerated—an intention, a warning, a reflection, a prep­
aration, an attempt at solving a problem, and so on. But if you
look properly, you will see that all this only applies to the
latent dream-thoughts, which have been transformed into the
dream. You learn from interpretations of dreams that people’s
unconscious thinking is concerned with these intentions, prep­
arations, reflections, and so on, out of which the dream-work
then makes the dreams. If at the moment you are not interested
1 [This was the first dream in the analysis of ‘Dora’ (1905e), Standard

Ed., 7, 64-7.]
2

[Cf. ‘An Evidential Dream’ (1913a).]

XIV. WISH-FULFILMENT

223

in the dream-work, but are greatly interested in people’s
unconscious thought-activity, you then eliminate the dream­
work and say of the dream what is in practice quite correct—
that it corresponds to a warning, an intention, and so on. What
often happens in psycho-analytic activity is that our efforts are
chiefly directed only to doing away with the dream-form and
inserting in the context instead of it the latent thoughts out of
which the dream was made.
Thus, quite incidentally, we learn from our examination of
the latent dream-thoughts that all these highly complicated
mental acts that we have named can take place unconsciously
—a discovery as imposing as it is perplexing!
But to go back, you are only correct so long as you are
clearly aware that you have used an abbreviated form of ex­
pression and so long as you do not believe that the multiplicity
you have been describing is to be related to the essential nature
of dreams. When you speak of a ‘dream’, you must mean either
the manifest dream—that is, the product of the dream-work—
or, at most, the dream-work itself as well—that is, the psychical
process which forms the manifest dream out of the latent
dream-thoughts. Any other use of the word is a confusion of
ideas and can only lead to mischief.1 If you are making state­
ments about the latent thoughts behind the dream, do so
directly and do not obscure the problem of dreams by the
loose manner in which you speak. The latent dream-thoughts
are the material which the dream-work transforms into the
manifest dream. Why should you want to confuse the material
with the activity which forms it? If you do, what advantage
have you over those who only knew the product of the activity
and could not explain where it came from or how it was made?
The only essential thing about dreams is the dream-work
that has influenced the thought-material. We have no right to
ignore it in our theory, even though we may disregard it in
certain practical situations. Analytic observation shows further
that the dream-work never restricts itself to translating these
thoughts into the archaic or regressive mode of expression that
1 [Further discussions on the proper use of the term ‘dream’ will be
found in two footnotes added in 1925 and 1914 respectively to I. of D.,
506-7 and 579-80, and also at the end of Section I of ‘Dreams and
Telepathy’ (1922a), Standard Ed., 18, 207-8.]

224

DREAMS

is familiar to you. In addition, it regularly takes possession of
something else, which is not part of the latent thoughts of the
previous day, but which is the true motive force for the con­
struction of the dream. This indispensable addition is the
equally unconscious wish for the fulfilment of which the content
of the dream is given its new form. A dream may thus be any
sort of thing in so far as you are only taking into account the
thoughts it represents—a warning, an intention, a preparation,
and so on; but it is always also the fulfilment of an unconscious
wish and, if you are considering it as a product of the dream­
work, it is only that. A dream is therefore never simply an
intention, or a warning, but always an intention, etc., translated
into the archaic mode of thought by the help of an uncon­
scious wish and transformed to fulfil that wish. [See p. 227, n. 2.]
The one characteristic, the wish-fulfilment, is the invariable
one; the other may vary. It may for its part once more be a wish,
in which case the dream will, with the help of an unconscious
wish, represent as fulfilled a latent wish of the previous day.
I can understand all this very clearly; but I cannot tell
whether I have succeeded in making it intelligible to you as
well. And I also have difficulty in proving it to you. That can­
not be done without carefully analysing a great many dreams,
and on the other hand this most critical and important point in
our view of dreams cannot be convincingly represented without
referring to what is coming later. It is impossible to suppose
that, since everything is intimately interrelated, one can pene­
trate deeply into the nature of one thing without having con­
cerned oneself with other things of a similar nature. Since we
still know nothing of the dream’s nearest relatives, neurotic
symptoms, we must once more rest content at this point with
what we have achieved. I will only give you one more illus­
trative example and lay before you one fresh consideration.
Let us once again take up the dream we have already so often
returned to: the dream of the three theatre-tickets for 1 florin 50.
(I can assure you that I originally chose out this example with­
out any special purpose in view.) You know the latent dream­
thoughts: anger at having been in such a hurry to get married
which arose when she heard the news that her friend had only
just become engaged, putting a low value on her husband and

XIV. WISH-FULFILMENT

225

the idea that she might have got a better one if only she had
waited. We already know the wish which made a dream out of
these thoughts: it was the desire to look, to be able to go to the
theatre, most probably an offshoot of her old curiosity to dis­
cover at long last what really happens when one is married.
This curiosity is, as we know, regularly directed by children
towards their parents’ sexual life; it is an infantile curiosity, and,
so far as it still persists later, an instinctual impulse with roots
reaching back into infancy. But the news the dreamer had
received during the day gave no occasion for awakening this
desire to look, but only for awakening anger and regret. This
wishful impulse was not in the first instance connected with the
latent dream-thoughts; and we were able to include the out­
come of the dream-interpretation in the analysis without taking
any account of that impulse. But the anger in itself was not
capable of creating a dream. A dream could not arise out of the
thoughts that ‘it was absurd to marry so early’ until they had
awakened the old wish to see at long last what happens in
marriage. This wish then gave the dream-content its form by
replacing marriage by going to the theatre, and the form was
that of an earlier wish-fulfilment: ‘There! now I may go to the
theatre and look at everything that’s forbidden, and you
mayn’t! I’m married and you must wait!’ In this way the
dreamer’s present situation was transformed into its opposite,
an old triumph was put in the place of her recent defeat. And,
incidentally, a satisfaction of her scopophilia was mixed with a
satisfaction of her egoistic competitive sense. This satisfaction
then determined the manifest content of the dream, in which
the position actually was that she was sitting in the theatre
while her friend could not gain admission to it. The portions of
the content of the dream behind which the latent dream­
thoughts still lay concealed were superimposed on this situation
of satisfaction as a misplaced and unintelligible modification of
it. The dream’s interpretation had to disregard everything that
served to represent the wish-fulfilment and to re-establish the
distressing latent dream-thoughts from these obscure remaining
hints.

The fresh consideration I wish to bring before you is to draw
your attention to the latent dream-thoughts which have now

226

DREAMS

been put in the foreground. I beg you not to forget that in the
first place they are unconscious1 to the dreamer, and secondly
that they are completely rational and coherent so that they can
be understood as natural reactions to the precipitating cause
of the dream, and thirdly that they can be the equivalent of any
mental impulse or intellectual operation. I shall now describe
these thoughts more strictly than before as the ‘day’s residues’,
whether the dreamer confesses to them or not. I shall now dis­
tinguish between the day’s residues and the latent dream­
thoughts, and, in conformity with our earlier usage, I shall
designate as latent dream-thoughts everything we learn in
interpreting the dream, whereas the day’s residues are only a
portion of the latent dream-thoughts. Our view is then that
something is added to the day’s residues, something that was
also part of the unconscious, a powerful but repressed wishful
impulse; and it is this alone that makes the construction of the
dream possible. The influence of this wishful impulse on the
day’s residues creates the further portion of the latent dream­
thoughts—that which need no longer appear rational and
intelligible as being derived from waking life.
I have made use of an analogy for the relation of the day’s
residues to the unconscious wish, and I can only repeat it here.
In every undertaking there must be a capitalist who covers the
required outlay and an entrepreneur who has the idea and knows
how to carry it out. In the construction of dreams, the part of
the capitalist is always played by the unconscious wish alone; it
provides the psychical energy for the construction of the dream.
The entrepreneur is the day’s residues, which decide how this
outlay is to be employed. It is possible, of course, for the
capitalist himself to have the idea and the expert knowledge
or for the entrepreneur himself to possess capital. This simplifies
the practical situation but makes its theoretical understanding
more difficult. In economics the same person is constantly
divided into his two aspects of capitalist and entrepreneur and this
restores the fundamental situation on which our analogy was
based. In dream-construction the same variations occur and I
will leave them for you to follow out.2
1 [See footnote p. 21 above.]
2 [This analogy appeared originally in Section C of Chapter VII of
I. of D., 5, 561-2, where it is illustrated at greater length.]

XIV. WISH-FULFILMENT

227

We cannot advance any further here, for you have probably
long been disturbed by a doubt which deserves to be given a
hearing. ‘Are the day’s residues,’ you will ask, ‘really uncon­
scious in the same sense as the unconscious wish which must be
added to them in order to make them capable of producing a
dream?’ Your suspicion is correct. This is the salient point of
the whole business. They are not unconscious in the same sense.
The dream-wish belongs to a different unconscious—to the one
which we have already recognized as being of infantile origin
and equipped with peculiar mechanisms [p. 210]. It would be
highly opportune to distinguish these two kinds of unconscious
by different names. But we would prefer to wait till we have
become familiar with the field of phenomena of the neuroses.
People consider a single unconscious as something fantastic.
What will they say when we confess that we cannot make shift
without two of them?1
Let us break off here. Once again you have only heard some­
thing incomplete. But is it not hopeful to reflect that this know­
ledge has a continuation, which either we ourselves or other
people will bring to light? And have not we ourselves learnt
enough that is new and surprising?
1 [The question of the uses of the term ‘unconscious’ was a crucial one
for Freud’s theories. He touched on it at several points in the course of
these lectures (particularly on pp. 113, 189,212,227, 294 ff. and—a last
brief mention—on p. 437). But he was evidently already feeling un­
comfortable about it and in fact revised his views on the whole subject
some years later in The Ego and the Id (19234). A full account of the
problem and its history will be found in the Editor’s Introduction to that
work, Standard Ed., 19, 4 ff. The new solution is also explained in
Lecture XXXI of the New Introductory Lectures (1933c).]
2 [Page 224, line 14. At the end of this sentence all the German
editions have the plural, ‘dieser Wiinsche (those wishes)’, which would
seem to obscure the meaning. An examination of the original manu­
script (which is not very clear) appears to show that Freud in fact wrote,
or intended to write, the singular, ‘dieses Wunsches’. A shorter, though
essentially similar, account of the whole process is given in ‘An Evidential
Dream’ (1913c), Standard Ed., 12, 273 ff.]

S.F. XV—P*

LECTURE XV

UNCERTAINTIES AND CRITICISMS
Ladies and Gentlemen,—We will nevertheless not leave the
field of dreams without dealing with the commonest doubts and
uncertainties which our novelties and our theories have given
rise to so far. Attentive listeners among you will themselves have
collected some of the relevant material.

(1) You may have formed an impression that, even though
the technique is correctly carried out, the findings of our inter­
pretative work on dreams admit of so many uncertainties as to
defeat any secure translation of the manifest dream into the
latent dream-thoughts. You will argue in support of this that
in the first place one never knows whether a particular element
of the dream is to be understood in its actual sense or as a
symbol, since the things employed as symbols do not cease on
that account to be themselves. If, however, one has no objective
clue for deciding this, the interpretation must at that point be
left to the arbitrary choice of the interpreter. Furthermore, as a
result of the fact that in the dream-work contraries coalesce, it
is always left undetermined whether a particular element is to
be understood in a positive or negative sense—as itself or as its
contrary [p. 178]. Here is a fresh opportunity for the inter­
preter to exercise an arbitrary choice. Thirdly, in consequence
of the reversals of every kind of which dreams are so fond
[p. 180], it is open to the interpreter to carry out a reversal
like this in connection with any passage in the dream he
chooses. And lastly, you will mention having heard that one is
never certain whether the interpretation one has found for a
dream is the only possible one. We run the risk of overlook­
ing a perfectly admissible ‘over-interpretation’ of the same
dream [p. 173]. In these circumstances, you will conclude,
so much room is left to the interpreter’s arbitrary decision
as to be incompatible with objective certainty in the find­
ings. Or alternatively you may suppose that the fault does
not lie with dreams but that the inadequacies of our dream228

XV. UNCERTAINTIES AND CRITICISMS
229
interpretation are to be attributed to errors in our views and
premisses.
All your material is unimpeachable, but it does not, I think,
justify your conclusions, and in two respects: namely that the
interpretation of dreams is, as you insist, at the mercy of arbi­
trary choice and that the lack of results throws doubts on the
correctness of our procedure. If instead of the interpreter’s
arbitrary choice you would speak of his skill, his experience and
his understanding, I should agree with you. We cannot, of
course, do without a personal factor of that kind, especially in
the more difficult problems of dream-interpretation. But the
position is no different in other scientific occupations. There is
no means of preventing one person from handling a particular
technique worse than another, or one person from making
better use of it than another. What in other ways gives an
impression of arbitrariness—in, for instance, the interpretation
of symbols—is done away with by the fact that as a rule the
interconnection between the dream-thoughts, or the connec­
tion between the dream and the dreamer’s life, or the whole
psychical situation in which the dream occurs, selects a single
one from among the possible determinations presented and dis­
misses the rest as unserviceable. The conclusion that because
of the imperfections of dream-interpretation our hypotheses are
incorrect is invalidated by pointing out that on the contrary
ambiguity or indefiniteness is a characteristic of dreams which
was necessarily to be anticipated.
Let us recall that we have said that the dream-work makes a
translation of the dream-thoughts into a primitive mode of ex­
pression similar to picture-writing [p. 175 ff.]. All such primi­
tive systems of expression, however, are characterized by in­
definiteness and ambiguity of this sort, without justifying us in
casting doubts on their serviceability. The coalescence of con­
traries in the dream-work is, as you know, analogous to the
so-called ‘antithetical meaning of primal words’ in the most
ancient languages. Indeed, Abel (1884), the philologist to
whom we owe this line of thought, implores us not to suppose
that communications made by one person to another with the
help of such ambivalent words were on that account ambiguous.
On the contrary, intonation and gesture must have made it
quite certain in the context of the speech which of the two

230

DREAMS

contraries the speaker intended to convey. In writing, where ges­
ture is absent, its place was taken by an additional pictograph
which was not intended to be spoken—for instance by a picture
of a little man, limply squatting or stiffly erect, according to
whether the ambiguous hieroglyph ‘keri was to mean ‘weak’ or
‘strong’. In this way, in spite of the ambiguity of the sounds and
signs, misunderstanding was avoided. [Cf. above, p. 179.]
The old systems of expression—for instance, the scripts of the
most ancient languages—betray vagueness in a variety of ways
which we would not tolerate in our writing to-day. Thus in
some Semitic scripts only the consonants in the words are in­
dicated. The reader has to insert the omitted vowels according
to his knowledge and the context. The hieroglyphic script be­
haves very similarly, though not precisely in the same way; and
for that reason the pronunciation of Ancient Egyptian remains
unknown to us. The sacred script of the Egyptians is indefinite
in yet other ways. For instance, it is left to the arbitrary decision
of the scribe whether he arranges the pictures from right to left
or from left to right. In order to be able to read it one must obey
the rule of reading towards the faces of the figures, birds, and
so on. But the scribe might also arrange the pictographs in
vertical columns, and in making inscriptions on comparatively
small objects he allowed considerations of decorativeness and
space to influence him in altering the sequence of the signs in
yet other ways. The most disturbing thing about the hiero­
glyphic script is, no doubt, that it makes no separation between
words. The pictures are placed across the page at equal dis­
tances apart; and in general it is impossible to tell whether a
sign is still part of the preceding word or forms the beginning
of a new word. In Persian cuneiform script, on the other hand,
an oblique wedge serves to separate words.
An extremely ancient language and script, which however is
still used by four hundred million people, is the Chinese. You
must not suppose that I at all understand it; I only obtained
some information about it because I hoped to find analogies in
it to the indefiniteness of dreams. Nor has my expectation been
disappointed. The Chinese language is full of instances of in­
definiteness which might fill us with alarm. As is well known, it
consists of a number of syllabic sounds, which are spoken either
singly or combined into pairs. One of the principal dialects has

XV. UNCERTAINTIES AND CRITICISMS

231

some four hundred such sounds. Since, however, the vocabulary
of this dialect is reckoned at about four thousand words, it
follows that each sound has on an average ten different mean­
ings—some fewer but some correspondingly more. There are
quite a number of methods of avoiding ambiguity, since one
cannot infer from the context alone which of the ten meanings
of the syllabic sound the speaker intends to evoke in the hearer.
Among these methods are those of combining two sounds into a
compound word and of using four different ‘tones’ in the pro­
nunciation of the syllables. It is even more interesting from the
point of view of our comparison to learn that this language has
practically no grammar. It is impossible to tell of any of the
monosyllabic words whether it is a noun or a verb or an adjec­
tive; and there are no verbal inflections by which one could
recognize gender, number, termination, tense or mood. Thus
the language consists, one might say, solely of the raw material,
just as our thought-language is resolved by the dream-work
into its raw material, and any expression of relations is omitted.
In Chinese the decision in all cases of indefiniteness is left to the
hearer’s understanding and this is guided by the context. I have
made a note of an example of a Chinese proverb which,
literally translated, runs:
‘Little what see much what wonderful.’
This is not hard to understand. It may mean: ‘The less some­
one has seen, the more he finds to wonder at’; or: ‘There is
much to wonder at for him who has seen little.’ There is, of
course, no question of distinguishing between these two trans­
lations, which only differ grammatically. In spite of this in­
definiteness, we have been assured that the Chinese language is
a quite excellent vehicle for the expression of thought. So in­
definiteness need not necessarily lead to ambiguity.
It must, of course, be admitted that the system of expression
by dreams occupies a far more unfavourable position than any
of these ancient languages and scripts. For after all they are
fundamentally intended for communication: that is to say, they
are always, by whatever method and with whatever assistance,
meant to be understood. But precisely this characteristic is
absent in dreams. A dream does not want to say anything to
anyone. It is not a vehicle for communication; on the contrary,
it is meant to remain ununderstood. For that reason we must

232

DREAMS

not be surprised or at a loss if it turns out that a number of
ambiguities and obscurities in dreams remain undecided. The
one certain gain we have derived from our comparison is the
discovery that these points of uncertainty which people have
tried to use as objections to the soundness of our dream-inter­
pretations are on the contrary regular characteristics of all
primitive systems of expression.
The question of how far the intelligibility of dreams in fact
extends can only be answered by practice and experience.1 Very
far, I believe; and my view is confirmed if we compare the re­
sults produced by correctly trained analysts. The lay public,
including the scientific lay public, are well known to enjoy
making a parade of scepticism when faced by the difficulties
and uncertainties of a scientific achievement. I think they are
wrong in this. You are perhaps not all aware that a similar
situation arose in the history of the deciphering of the Baby­
lonian-Assyrian inscriptions. There was a time when public
opinion was very much inclined to regard the decipherers of
cuneiform as visionaries and the whole of their researches as a
‘swindle’. But in 1857 the Royal Asiatic Society made a de­
cisive experiment. It requested four of the most highly respected
experts in cuneiform, Rawlinson, Hincks, Fox Talbot and
Oppert, to send it, in sealed envelopes, independent transla­
tions of a newly discovered inscription; and, after a comparison
between the four productions, it was able to announce that the
agreement between these experts went far enough to justify a
belief in what had so far been achieved and confidence in
further advances. The derision on the part of the learned lay
world gradually diminished after this, and since then certainty
in reading cuneiform documents has increased enormously.
(2) A second group of doubts is closely connected with the
impression, which no doubt you yourselves have not escaped,
that a number of the solutions to which we find ourselves
driven in interpreting dreams seem to be forced, artificial,
dragged in by the hair of their head—arbitrary, that is, or even
comic and facetious. Remarks to this effect are so frequent that
1 [Cf. a later paper on ‘The Limits to the Possibility of Interpretation’,
Section A of ‘Some Additional Notes on Dream-Interpretation as a
Whole’ (1925t).]

XV. UNCERTAINTIES AND CRITICISMS

233

I will choose at random the last that has been reported to me.
So listen to this. In free Switzerland the head of a training­
college was recently removed from his post on account of his
interest in psycho-analysis. He entered a protest, and a Berne
newspaper published the report of the school authorities on his
appeal. I will select a few sentences dealing with psycho­
analysis from this document: ‘Moreover we are surprised at the
far-fetched and artificial character of many of the examples,
which are also to be found in the volume by Dr. Pfister of
Zurich which is quoted. ... It is really surprising, therefore,
that the head of a training-college should accept all these asser­
tions and pretended proofs without criticism.’ These sentences
are represented as a decision reached by someone ‘making a
calm judgement’. It is rather this calmness, I think, which is
‘artificial’. Let us examine these remarks more closely, in the
expectation that a little reflection and a little expert know­
ledge can be of no disadvantage even to a calm judgement.
It is truly refreshing to see how swiftly and unerringly a
person can arrive at a judgement on some delicate problem of
depth-psychology after his first impression of it. The inter­
pretations seem to him far-fetched and forced and he does not
like them; so they are false and all this t business of inter­
pretation is worthless. Not even a fleeting hought is given to
the other possibility—that there are good reasons why these
interpretations are bound to have this appearance; after
wh ch the further question would follow of what these good
reasons are.
The matter under consideration rela tes in essence to the re­
sults of displacement, which you have become acquainted with
as the most powerful instrument of the dream-censorship. With
the help of displacement the dream-censorship creates sub­
stitutive structures which we have described as allusions. But
they are allusions which are not easily recognizable as such,
from which the path back to the genuine thing is not easily
traced, and which are connected with the genuine thing by the
strangest, most unusual, external associations.1 In all these cases
it is a question, however, of things which are meant to be hidden,
which are condemned to concealment, for that is what the
dream-censorship is aiming at. But we must not expect that a
1 [See footnote 1, p. 174 above.]

234

DREAMS

thing which has been hidden will be found in its own place, in
its proper position. The frontier-control commissions which are
operating to-day are more cunning in this respect than the
Swiss school authorities. In their search for documents and plans
they are not content with examining brief-cases and portfolios,
but they consider the possibility that spies and smugglers may
have these forbidden things in the most secret portions of their
clothing where they decidedly do not belong—for instance, be­
tween the double soles of their boots. If the hidden things are
there, it will certainly be possible to call them ‘far-fetched’, but
it is also true that a great deal will have been found.1
If we recognize that the links between a latent dream-element
and its manifest substitute can be of the most out-of-the-way
and peculiar nature, sometimes appearing comic and some­
times resembling a joke, we are basing ourselves on copious ex­
perience of examples which, as a rule, we have not solved our­
selves. It is often impossible to give such interpretations on our
own account: no sensible person could guess at the connection.
The dreamer gives us the translation either all at once by a
direct association—he is able to, since it was he who produced
the substitute—or else he brings up so much material that the
solution no longer calls for any particular acumen, but presents
itself, so to speak, as a matter of course. If the dreamer fails to
assist in one or other of these two ways, the manifest element in
question will for ever remain unintelligible to us. I will, if I
may, give you an example which occurred to me recently. One
of my women patients lost her father in the course of the treat­
ment. Since then she has taken every opportunity of bringing
him to life in her dreams. In one of these her father appeared
(in a particular connection of no further relevance) and said:
‘It’s a quarter past eleven, it’s half-past eleven, it’s a quarter to twelve.’
By way of interpretation of this oddity all that occurred to her
was that her father liked his grown-up children to appear
punctually at the family meals. No doubt this was connected
with the dream-element, but it threw no light on its origin.
There was a suspicion, based on the immediate situation in the
treatment, that a carefully suppressed critical revolt against her
beloved and honoured father played some part in the dream.
In the further course of her associations, apparently remote
1 [There is some untranslatable punning here in the original.]

XV. UNCERTAINTIES AND CRITICISMS

235

from the dream, she told how the day before there had been a
lot of talk about psychology in her presence, and a relative of
hers had remarked: ‘The Urmensch [primal man] survives in all
of us.’ This seemed to provide us with the explanation. It had
given her an excellent opportunity of bringing her dead father
to life once again. She made him in the dream into an ‘Uhrmensch’ [‘clock-man’] by making him announce the quarter­
hours at midday.
You will not be able to escape the resemblance of this
example to a joke; and it has in fact often happened that a joke
of the dreamer’s has been regarded as a joke of the interpreter’s.
There are other instances in which it has been far from easy to
decide whether what we are dealing with is a joke or a dream.
But you will recall that the same doubt arose in the case of some
parapraxes—slips of the tongue [p. 43 f.]. A man reported as a
dream of his that his uncle had given him a kiss while they were
sitting in his auto (mobile).1 He himself very quickly added the
interpretation: it meant ‘auto-erotism’ (a term from the theory of
the libido, indicating satisfaction obtained without any outside
object). Had the man set out, then, to have some fun with us
and was he passing off a joke that had occurred to him as a
dream? I think not; I believe he really dreamt it. But what is
the origin of this puzzling similarity? This question once led me
temporarily aside from my path by compelling me to make
jokes themselves the subject of a detailed investigation.2 It was
there shown how jokes originate: a preconscious3 train of
thought is abandoned for a moment to be worked over in the
unconscious, and from this it emerges as a joke. Under the in­
fluence of the unconscious it is subjected to the effects of the
mechanisms that hold sway there—condensation and displace­
ment—the same processes that we have found concerned in the
dream-work; and it is to this common feature that is to be
ascribed the similarity, when it occurs, between jokes and
dreams. But the unintended ‘dream-joke’ brings none of the
1 [This dream is reported in I. of D., 5, 408-9.]
2 [Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious (1905c). Freud relates in
I. of D., 4, 297-8 n., how he was led into writing that work by a critic
(Wilhelm Fliess) who complained that the dreams he reported were too
full of jokes. See also a passage on this point in the book on jokes
itself (Standard Ed., 8, 173).]
8 [This term is explained in Lecture XIX, p. 296 below.]

236

DREAMS

yield of pleasure of a true joke. You can learn why if you go
more deeply into the study of jokes. A‘dream-joke’ strikes us as
a bad joke; it does not make us laugh, it leaves us cold.1
In this, however, we are treading in the footsteps of the
dream-interpretation of antiquity, which, along with much that
is unserviceable, has left us some good examples of dream­
interpretation, which we ourselves could not better. I will re­
peat to you a dream which was of historic importance and
which is reported of Alexander the Great, with slight variations,
by Plutarch and Artemidorus of Daldis [cf. p. 86 above].
When the king was laying siege to the obstinately defended city
of Tyre (322 b.c.), he once dreamt that he saw a dancing satyr.
Aristander, the dream-interpreter, who was present with the
army, interpreted the dream by dividing the word ‘Satyros’ into
cd Tvqoq [sa Turos] (thine is Tyre), and therefore promised
that he would triumph over the city. Alexander was led by this
interpretation to continue the siege and eventually captured
Tyre. The interpretation, which has a sufficiently artificial
appearance, was undoubtedly the right one.2

[3) I can well imagine that you will be especially impressed
when you hear that objections to our view of dreams have even
been made by people who have themselves, as psycho-analysts,
been engaged for a considerable time in interpreting dreams. It
would have been too much to expect that such an abundant
encouragement to fresh errors as this theory offers should have
been neglected; and so, as a result of conceptual confusions and
unjustified generalizations, assertions have been made which
are not far behind the medical view of dreams in their incorrect­
ness. You know one of them already. It tells us that dreams are
concerned with attempts at adaptation to present conditions
and with attempts at solving future problems—that they have
a ‘prospective purpose’ (Maeder [1912]). We have already
shown [p. 222] that this assertion is based on a confusion
between the dream and the latent dream-thoughts and is there­
fore based on disregarding the dream-work. As a characteriza1 [See Chapter VI of the book on jokes, and in particular Standard
Ed., 8, 173 and 179-80. The point has already been mentioned above
on p. 174.]
2 [This is also reported in I. of D., 4, 99 n.]

XV. UNCERTAINTIES AND CRITICISMS

237

tion of the unconscious intellectual activity of which the latent
dream-thoughts form part, it is on the one hand no novelty and
on the other not exhaustive, since unconscious intellectual
activity is occupied with many other things besides preparing
for the future.1 A far worse confusion seems to underlie the
assurance that the idea of death will be found behind every
dream [Stekel, 1911, 34]. I am not clear exactly what is meant
by this formula. But I suspect that it conceals a confusion be­
tween the dream and the dreamer’s whole personality. [Cf.
I. of D., 5, 397.]
An unjustifiable generalization, based on a few good
examples, is involved in the statement that every dream allows
of two interpretations—one which agrees with our account, a
‘psycho-analytic’ one, and another, an ‘anagogic’ one, which
disregards the instinctual impulses and aims at representing the
higher functions of the mind (Silberer [1914]).12 There are
dreams of this kind, but you will try in vain to extend this view
even to a majority of dreams. Again, after all that I have said
to you, you will find quite incomprehensible an assertion that
all dreams are to be interpreted bisexaully, as a confluence of
two currents described as a masculine and a feminine one
(Adler [1910]). [Cf. I. of D., 5, 397.] There are, of course, a
few dreams of this kind too; and you may learn later that they
are constructed like certain hysterical symptoms. The reason
why I have mentioned all these discoveries of fresh universal
characteristics of dreams is in order to warn you against them
or at least to leave you in no doubt as to what I think of them.
(4) One day the objective value of research into dreams
seemed to be put in question by an observation that patients
under analytic treatment arrange the content of their dreams in
accordance with the favourite theories of their physicians—
some dreaming predominantly of sexual instinctual impulses,
others of the struggle for power and yet others even of
1 [This theory of Maeder’s was dealt with at length by Freud in two
footnotes to I. of D., 5, 506-7 and 579-80.]
2 [This was fully discussed in I. of D., 5, 523-4, as well as in ‘Dreams
and Telepathy’ (1922a), Standard Ed., 18, 216 and in a footnote to ‘A
Metapyschological Supplement to the Theory of Dreams’ (1917J), ibid.,
14, 228.]

238

DREAMS

rebirth (Stekel). The weight of this observation was, however,
diminished by the reflection that human beings had dreams
before there was any psycho-analytic treatment which could
give those dreams a direction, and that people who are now
under treatment used also to dream during the period before
the treatment started. What was true about this novelty could
soon be seen to be self-evident and of no relevance to the theory
of dreams. The day’s residues which instigate dreams are left
over from powerful interests in waking life. When the remarks
made by the physician and the hints he gives become of sig­
nificance to the patient, they enter the circle of the day’s resi­
dues and can provide psychical stimuli for the construction of
dreams like any other emotionally coloured interests of the pre­
vious day which have not been dealt with, and they then
operate like somatic stimuli which impinge on the sleeper
during his sleep. The trains of thought set going by the physi­
cian can, like these other instigators of dreams, appear in the
manifest content of a dream or be discovered in its latent con­
tent. Indeed, we know that a dream can be experimentally
produced, or, to put it more correctly, a part of the dream­
material can be introduced into the dream. In producing these
effects on his patients, an analyst is thus playing a part no dif­
ferent from an experimenter who, like Mourly Void, gives par­
ticular postures to the limbs of the subjects of his experiments.
[Cf. p. 87 above.]
It is often possible to influence dreamers as to what they shall
dream about, but never as to what they shall dream. The
mechanism of the dream-work and the unconscious dream­
wish are exempt from any outside influence. In consider­
ing dreams with a somatic stimulus, we have already found
[p. 96 f.] that the characteristic nature and independence of
dream-life are shown in the reaction with which dreams respond
to the somatic or mental stimuli that are brought to bear. The
thesis which we have been discussing, and which seeks to throw
doubt on the objectivity of research into dreams, is thus once
again based on a confusion—this time between the dream and
the dream-material.1
1 [For a further discussion of this, see Section VII of‘Remarks on the
Theory and Practice of Dream-Interpretation’ (1923c), Standard Ed.,
19, 113 ff.]

XV. UNCERTAINTIES AND CRITICISMS

239

This then, Ladies and Gentlemen, is what I wanted to tell
you about the problems of dreams. As you will guess, there is
much that I have had to pass over, and you will have been
aware that on almost every point what I have said has neces­
sarily been incomplete. That, however, is due to the connection
between the phenomena of dreaming and those of the neuroses.
We have studied dreams as an introduction to the theory of the
neuroses, and this was certainly a more correct procedure than
if we had done the opposite. But just as dreams prepare the
way to an understanding of the neuroses, so, on the other hand,
a true appreciation of dreams can only be achieved after a
knowledge of neurotic phenomena.1
I cannot tell what you will think of it, but I must assure you
that I do not regret having claimed so much of your interest
and of the time available to us for the problems of dreams.
There is nothing else from which one can so quickly arrive at
a conviction of the correctness of the theses by which psycho­
analysis stands or falls. Exacting work over many months and
even years is called for to show that the symptoms of a case of
neurotic illness have a sense, serve a purpose and arise out of
the patient’s experiences in life. On the other hand, only a few
hours’ effort may be enough to prove that the same thing is true
of a dream which is, to start with, confused to the point of
being unintelligible, and thus to confirm all the premisses of
psycho-analysis—the unconscious nature of mental processes,
the peculiar mechanisms which they obey and the instinctual
forces which are expressed in them. And when we bear in mind
the sweeping analogy between the structure of dreams and that
of neurotic symptoms and at the same time consider the rapidity
of the transformation which makes a dreamer into a waking
and reasonable man, we arrive at a certainty that neuroses too
are based only on an alteration in the play of forces between
the powers of mental life.2
1 [There is a reference back to dreams near the end of the last
lecture of the present series, p. 456 below.]
2 [Freud dealt with the subject of dreams again in the first of his New
Introductory Lectures (1933a), Lecture XXIX.]

